---
{
  "datetime": "2019-06-27T00:25:00Z",
  "updatedAt": null,
  "title": "Cleaner scheduled posts publication with the GitHub Trees API",
  "description": "Rather than delete a post from the scheduled directory and create it again in the posts directory as separate commits, it's possible to move one or more files without deletion in a single commit using the GitHub Trees API.",
  "tags": [
    "AboutThisBlog",
    "REST",
    "IndieWeb"
  ]
}
---
In [a previous post][previous-post] I talked about an npm script I had written
to be executed by a GitHub action:

> Sadly, there's no way to move a file using the Contents API, so the create-then-delete is necessary. This leads to two commits rather than just one. It may be possible to do it in a single commit using the Trees API, but that's a good deal more involved and I don't mind a little noise in the commit history.

I was fibbing! The additional commit does bother me, so I decided to do a partial rewrite to make use of the Trees API. It involves a number of requests to the API, but the result is that files are moved rather than deleted and then recreated (so the history of the file properly follows it), and one or more files can be moved for a single commit, keeping the history clean.

There is a slight chance that a response for a tree request will be truncated, which breaks the current implementation. It's unlikely to happen anytime soon though. Should it happen, it's possible to construct the trees without making any requests since the GitHub action executing the script has a clone of the repository. That requires git to be installed, or a library that understands the git database, and that means more complexity than I'm prepared to handle right now. It's a good option for if truncation happens or if I decide to squeeze more performance from the script.

[previous-post]: /blog/how-i-schedule-posts-using-github-actions
