---
datetime: "2017-03-04T17:00Z"
title: "Making a todo service with Toisu!"
---
Toisu! is a tiny Node.js server framework I built for Node to provide express
like features with less bulk and which use modern features of JavaScript such
as promises and asynchronous functions.

It doesn't do much. It's designed to do the essentials and be pluggable. Out of
the box it provides little more than middleware sequencing and error handling.
The killer feature (in my opinion) is how middleware functions are written for
it. Middleware has the signature:

```javascript
function someMiddleware(request, response) { /*...*/ }
```

This is the same as a vanilla Node request handler. The magic of Toisu is in how
asynchronous middleware is handled. If the middleware returns a promise, then
Toisu! waits until the promise resolves before calling the next middleware. By
doing this a lot of weirdness is avoided, like express' middleware callbacks
and koa's callback or yield object.

The neat thing about middleware returning promises is that you can replace such
middleware with asynchronous functions (async-await), since from the outside
and async function looks like a regular function which returns a promise!

Below is an example of an async middleware.

```javascript
async function resolveMemo(req, res) {
  const params = this.get('params');
  const memo = await db.oneOrNone('SELECT * FROM todos WHERE id=$1', params.id);

  if (!memo) {
    res.writeHead(404);
    res.end();
    return;
  }

  this.set('memo', memo);
}
```

This middleware users the `pg-promise` module. Since functions of that module
return promises, they can be awaited within an asynchronous function. The
middleware function `resolveMemo` is from an imaginary todos service. The
middleware will know the ID of the memo to retrieve from the URL (more on this
later). Using the ID, the middleware attempts to retrieve a memo. If no memo is
found, the middleware responds with a 404 (not found). When a memo is found, the
middleware appends it to a context shared by all middleware in the sequence for
a request.

Externally, when `resolveMemo` is called it returns a promise. This promise
either rejects (an error is thrown in getMemo or a promise which rejects is
returned), which might happen on a postgres connection error, or it resolve,
which will happen at a return point in `resolveMemo`.
