---
datetime: '2018-08-06T12:08:06Z'
updatedAt: '2018-08-09T14:23:00Z'
title: Automatic dispatch of webmentions
description: >-
  This blog already has a solution for receiving webmentions, but dispatch is
  manual. In this post I consider reusing the sitemap mechanism I put together
  for automated notifications of new blog entries.
tags:
  - AboutThisBlog
  - glitch
---
In [the last post][1] I detailed the way I use a netlify notification configured
to POST to a glitch app, which in turn checks changes to the sitemap to detect
new blog enties.

This mechanism can be used to perform all sorts of actions upon a blog entry
being added. Another action I've implemented is the dispatch of
[webmentions][2]. I already use [webmention.io][3] to receive and hold
webmentions sent to this site, but until now I've been dispatching them manually
using a little utility I wrote in Node.

Since I've discussed how I detect new entires in the last post, I won't go over
that part again. The new thing which a webmentions dispatch glitch will do is
parse new blog entries for external links, and use those to determine webmention
URLs (where implemented) and POST mentions to them.

The light weight approach feels like a better initial solution, and it can be
enhanced toward the comprehensive version if needed in the future. Right now
the glitch app:

 - Is triggered with a Netlify webhook (configured to fire on successful deployment).
 - Downloads the sitemap.txt file, and filters it for blog entries.
 - Compares the list of entries with entries stored in an sqlite database, fitering out old entries.
 - Requests and parses new blog entries for URLs.
 - Filters out URLs which go back to the blog, to twitter, to mastodon, or to my payment link.
 - Checks each remaining URL for a webmention URL, dispatching mentions to those which have them.
 - Store successful mentions in the database.

There are edge cases to note. For example, once an entry is published the glitch
app will consider it to have been handled. Updates to the entry which add,
remove, or update links will be ignored. Some time ago I discussed a more
comprehensive approach at a Homebrew Website Club session with
[Jeremy Keith][4]. That approach was also to be implemented as a glitch app, but
it would parse every enry and check against an sqlite database of dispatched
mentions against entries. It would have been capable of handling updates to
posts, as well as retry of failed mention POSTs. I eventually backed away from
this as too complex for an initial implementation, and I forgot to do anything
about it until now.

The way I've implemented the glitch app using sqlite allows this approach to be
expanded to cover some of the edge cases. In the future I'd like to also store
ETags of posts. Each hook trigger will lead requests for all blog URLs, and
those with changed ETags will be downloaded and parsed for `<time>` elements
with a `dt-updated` class. Entries with a changed `dt-update` will be considered
changed and fresh URLs will have webmentions dispatched for them. The checking
of `dt-updated` is important since any changes to CSS will lead to new ETags for
every post.

[1]: /blog/automatic-announcement-of-new-blog-entries
[2]: https://indieweb.org/Webmention
[3]: https://webmention.io/
[4]: https://adactio.com/
