---
datetime: "2016-01-05T01:58Z"
title: "About this blog, part 2"
---
I touched briefly on the technology used in this blog in
[a previous post](/blog/about-this-blog.html), but I didn't explain the motivation behind a lot of
the choices I made when building it. I'd like to do that in this post. The driving principles were
simplicity, privacy, and efficiency.

## Simplicity

Visually this blog is very simple. This is mainly because I'm no designer! I was guided by certain
gripes I have with blogs elsewhere though. For example, I frequently come across how-to posts which
don't have dates. This is frustrating because I need to know if the information might be old and
stale.

It seems very common these days for blog posts and articles to start with an enormous image or title
so big that the reader must scroll to begin reading. This is horrible in all sorts of ways. Besides
the obvious badness of requiring user interaction to even begin to read, an image that big probably
outweighs the rest of the page by far. Needless to say, I'm completely against this nonsense. This
site can be viewed on most devices without needing to scroll to read.

The CSS for this site is simple. I've used flexbox for simple responsiveness. It uses the width of
the device used to read it up to a maximum of 800px, remaining centred thereafter. Pinch to zoom is
_not_ disabled.

I've opted for no comments. Comments entail complexity. If I hand rolled them, then I'd need to use
a database. If I went with a service, then that means more requests and rendering for the browser.
I'm not convinced that comments are even worth it. If something is really worth saying you can tweet
to me. If that's too small, then tweet me a [gist](https://gist.github.com/) or use
[JS Bin](https://jsbin.com/). There are downsides to this approach. It's not obvious when a question
has already been asked or a point already made. I'll cross that bridge if this blog becomes popular
enough to suffer such issues.

## Privacy (HTTPS and no tracking)

It doesn't matter that this blog is entirely benign. The privacy of my readers must be respected.
HTTPS is essential, and thankfully [Let's Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org) is now here to offer
free certificates. The process is a bit manual for servers using NGINX, but I expect that to improve
with time. Compared with the pain of buying and configuring hosting and a domain name, it's really
quite easy.

I don't currently use Google Analytics for tracking. It doesn't sit well from a privacy perspective.

## Efficiency

On the server side, a generator turns markdown into HTML for hosting. This avoids rendering on the
server and databases. For the browser, complete pages mean a page is rendered once. I really like
single page apps and rendering in the browser just like you, but this is just a blog. Static
generation means less overhead on both the server and the client, so everyone wins.

On the client side, I've avoided huge images and web fonts so the effective size of a blog post is
very small, increasing the odds that a browser on a crappy network can retrieve the entire thing.
I also inline the minified CSS in a style tag in the head of each post so that only one request is
needed to retrieve the average page.
