---
{
  "datetime": "2016-01-31T02:00Z",
  "title": "Private methods for JS classes",
  "description": "This is a sequel to my post on private data for JS class instances. I show how to provide private methods for instances.",
  "tags": [
    "JavaScript"
  ]
}
---
This is a short companion to an
[earlier article I wrote](/blog/private-data-for-js-classes-with-weakmap) on using `WeakMap` for
private data with JS classes. While private data belongs to instances, private methods can be shared
between instances of a class (just like its regular methods). An implementation using ES2015 modules
looks like:

```javascript
function setContent(content) {
  const text = document.createTextNode(content);

  this.el.appendChild(text);
}

export default class Paragraph {
  constructor(content) {
    this.el = document.createElement('p');

    setContent.call(this, content);
  }

  replace(content) {
    this.el.innerHTML = '';

    setContent.call(this, content);
  }
}
```

This module exports a class which wraps a paragraph element (which is not a particularly useful
thing to do, but hopefully illustrates what I'm about to say).

Each instance of `Paragraph` is constructed with some content. The one public method it has is
`replace`, which allows the content to be replaced. Both the `constructor` and the `replace` methods
set content, so rather than repeat the code that does that, the code is placed in the private method
`setContent`. `setContent` operates on a `Paragraph` instance passed in as the context by using
`call`. You could just as easily pass the instance in by using a parameter. I've chosen the former
approach here to keep the difference between public and private methods to the minimum.

By virtue of the `setContent` method being declared outside of the class declaration, the class does
not make it available. You control which things you export from the module, so if the class doesn't
make `replace` available, and the module doesn't export it, then nothing outside the module has
access. Thus `setContent` is a private method.

For clarity, `replace` being public means that I can do this:

```javascript
var paragraph = new Paragraph('hello');

// replace is pubic, so we can use it.
paragraph.replace('goodbye');
```

And `setContent` being private means that I cannot do this:

```javascript
var paragraph = new Paragraph('hello');

// setContent is not a part of the Paragraph
// definition. We cannot do this.
paragraph.setContent('goodbye');
```

So there you have it. There's not a lot to the pattern really. Earlier module types and patterns
allow the same thing to be done. I recommend reading the [section on module patterns](https://addyosmani.com/resources/essentialjsdesignpatterns/book/#modulepatternjavascript)
in Addy Osmani's excellent book _Learning JavaScript Design Patterns_ if you want to know more (and
particularly the sub section on the _module pattern_).
