---
{
  "datetime": "2016-09-05T20:00Z",
  "title": "Tip: customizing npm version",
  "description": "I use npm as a build tool since it's lean and avoids piles of dependencies while keeping the build portable. I demonstrate how to tweak the version script.",
  "tags": [
    "npmjs"
  ]
}
---
The npm CLI has a bunch of useful utilities for managing projects. The obvious
one is `npm test` but there are others. I particularly like working with
`npm version` (the subject of this tip).

Without customization, `npm version` checks that the working git directory is
clean, sets the new version in the package file, and then commits it and tags
the repository with the same new version.

That's great, but what if you have a `bower.json` file, or some other task which
needs the new version before the tag is made? `npm version` updates the version
in `package.json` and it misses the version in the `bower.json` file. The
`bower.json` version is just an example, but one that illustrates this point.

This is where customizing `npm version` comes in. Continuing the `bower.json`
example, we can write a script which performs the version update, and
uses `git add` on it. In the `package.json` file:

```javascript
{
  "name": "my lovely app",
  "version": 1.0.0,
  "scripts": {
    "version": "node update-bower-version.js && git add bower.json"
  }
}
```

To reiterate, `npm version` will update the version in the package file, run the
version script above, and then commit the changes and tag the result. That means
that the script needs to do something to the `bower.json` file, then `git add`
the result.

```javascript
// update-bower-version.js

var fs = require('fs');
var bowerJsonPath = require.resolve('./bower');
var bowerJson = require(bowerJsonPath);

bowerJson.version = process.env.npm_package_version; // npm injects this

fs.writeFileSync(bowerJsonPath, JSON.stringify(bowerJson, null, 2));
```

This script is going to be run by `npm` from the `package.json` file, which
handily [injects some environment variables][1]. One of these variables is the
version in the `package.json` file. This is great because it means that no
matter what the new version will be we have access to it in this script.

Since the `bower.json` file contains JSON it can be read and parsed by `require`
in one step. The version is updated, and the result stringified (I'm using two
space indentation here) and written back to the bower file.

With a script in place, you can use `npm version` without further thought. for
example, a major version bump looks like:

```bash
npm version major
```

Enjoy!

[1]: https://docs.npmjs.com/misc/scripts#packagejson-vars
