---
datetime: "2017-12-01T20:00Z"
title: "Tip: Array.from"
description: "Array.from can map its input without an explicit call to map!"
tags:
  - JavaScript
---
⚠️ SPOILER ALERT BEGINS ⚠️: If you're doing the advent of code this year, you may
not want to read onward. This post _does not_ give any solutions away, but does
contain information about how I approached a part of the first challenge.

Onward!

Today I started doing the [2017 advent of code][1] challenges (don't worry, I
won't give solutions away). The first challenge involves summing numbers in a
sequence. The sequence itself is too long to express as an integer, and that
wouldn't be particularly useful for the task anyway. The most convenient form
is probably an array of integers. The sequence is given as raw text, and the
quickest way to get it into JS is as a string.

There are a few ways to do this which spring to mind. One might argue that you
can loop directly over a string anyway, but getting a list of integers avoids
parsing each character in the string more than once for these tasks, so let's
ignore that option.

The first thing to come to mind was a loop:

```javascript
const numbers = [];

for (let i = 0; i < sequence.length; i++) {
  numbers.push(parseInt(sequence[i], 10));
}
```

There's a slightly nicer to read version of this introduced by ES2015:

```javascript
const numbers = [];

for (const character of sequence) {
  numbers.push(parseInt(character, 10));
}
```

Both suffer from being a bit bulky though. ES2015 also introduced
[`Array.from`][2] and the [spread operator (`...`)][3], which offer a similar
way of creating an array when used in combination with `Array.prototype.map`:

```javascript
const numbers = [...sequence].map(char => parseInt(char, 10));
// or
const numbers = Array.from(sequence).map(char => parseInt(char, 10));
```

The first spreads characters from the sequence into an array, and maps these
characters to a fresh array of numbers. The second uses `Array.from` to get an
array of characters from a string, and uses the same mapping to get an array
of integers.

I prefer the latter of the two (it's a little easier for humans to parse). It
would be nice to avoid the explicit mapping though, right? The solution I
settled upon was to use the little-known second parameter to `Array.from`. It
turns out you can include a function to map elements to be incerted into the
returned array:

```javascript
const numbers = Array.from(sequence, char => parseInt(char, 10));
```

Which is my tip! In essence, don't do this:

```javascript
[...stuff].map(func);
```

Or this:

```javascript
Array.from(stuff).map(func);
```

Do this:

```javascript
Array.from(stuff, func);
```

[1]: https://adventofcode.com
[2]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/from
[3]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Spread_operator
