---
{
  "datetime": "2018-01-02T20:50Z",
  "title": "Advent of Code 2017 day 20 task 2",
  "description": "The second problem for the 2017 Advent of Code on day 20 was fun!",
  "tags": [
    "JavaScript"
  ]
}
---
SPOILER ALERT: If you're doing the 2017 Advent of Code, you may not want to read
onward.

Over the holiday period I found a little time to work on the
[2017 advent of code][1] challenges. The later ones get quite involved, and I
particularly enjoyed day 20. The second part of the task involves a 3D grid
containing accelerating particles. Particles which collide at a grid point
(occupy that point at the same time) are removed, and we're asked to determine
how many particles remain after all collisions have occurred. This one was
fun for me because the solution I came up with involved a little mathematics to
avoid brute forcing the answer.

At this point in the challenges, writing a parser for an input file is something
I'll skip over. The parser gives back an array of objects, each representing a
particle, with $p$, $v$, and $a$ fields to represent position, velocity, and
acceleration respectively. These quantities are all represented as length three
arrays for the $x$, $y$, and $z$ axes. The input looks like:

```json
[
  {
    "p": [-4897, 3080, 2133],
    "v": [-58, -15, -78],
    "a": [17, -7, 0]
  },
  {
    "p": [395, -997, 4914],
    "v": [-30, 66, -69],
    "a": [1,-2,-8]
  },
  {
    "p": [-334, -754, -567],
    "v": [-31, 15, -34],
    "a": [3,1,4]
  },
  // ...
]
```

The general algorithm I used was to calculate a collision times for each pair
of particles, order them by time ascending, and then remove all pairs for
each time step when both colliding particles are still in the set of all
particles up to that time (earlier collisions can invalidate later collisions
since collisions remove colliding particles).

To calculate potential collisions, I used the following:

```javascript
const collisions = [];

for (let i = 0; i < input.length - 1; i++) {
    for (let j = i + 1; j < input[i].length; j++) {
        const t = collisionTime(input[i], input[j]);

        if (t !== null) {
            if (!collisions[t]) {
                collisions[t] = [];
            }

            collisions[t].push([i, j]);
        }
    }
}
```

I've used the index of each particle in the input array as its ID for
convenience. The snippet grabs all pairs and uses the function `collisionTime`,
which returns either an integer (time of their first collision from $t=0$), or
`null` if they never collide. The `collisions` array is indexed by time step,
and populated with arrays of collisions. I'll come back to `collisionTime`
later, because that's where interesting things happen.

Next I create a set containing the IDs of all particles.

```javascript
const particles = new Set(Array.from({ length: input.length }, (v, i) => i));
```

See [my `Array.from` tip][2] for a partial explanation of this, and the
[MDN article on `Set`][3] for the rest.

The rest is looping over collision times to discover which collisions are valid
(both particles have not yet collided) and remove the particles which collide
from the particles set. The size of the set after all collisions have been
checked is the number of remaining particles, which is the goal of this problem.

```javascript
for (const collisionsAtTime of collisions) {
    if (!collisionsAtTime) {
        continue;
    }

    const toDelete = new Set();

    for (const [a, b] of collisionsAtTime) {
        if (particles.has(a) && particles.has(b)) {
            toDelete.add(a);
            toDelete.add(b);
        }
    }

    for (const index of toDelete) {
        particles.delete(index);
    }
}

console.log(particles.size);
```

I don't care about the time of each set of collisions; I only care about the
order. Since `collisions` is a sparse array (indexed by time step), I do have to
check for `undefined` elements and `continue` to skip those.

I've modelled all collisions as pairs, so a collision between three or more
particles will look like multiple collisions of pairs at the same time. In order
to properly count these, particle IDs to be removed are held in the `toDelete`
set and removed after all collisions at a given time step have been checked.

Let's go back to the function `collisionTime`. For a given pair of particle
objects, it determines when their first collision is beginning at $t=0$. Here's
a naïve implementation:

```javascript
// Calculates the Manhatten distance between two particles.
function manhatten(a, b) {
    return Math.abs(a[0] - b[0]) + Math.abs(a[1] - b[1]) + Math.abs(a[2] - b[2]);
}

function vectorAdd(a, b) {
    return [a[0] + b[0], a[1] + b[1], a[2] + b[2]];
}

// Returns a new particle which represents the evolution of a given particle by
// one time step.
function tick(particle) {
    const a = particle.a.slice();
    const v = vectorAdd(particle.v, a);
    const p = vectorAdd(particle.p, v);

    return { p, v, a };
}

function collisionTime(a, b) {
    let nextD = manhatten(a.p, b.p);

    // Trivial case in which particles are initially in the same place.
    if (nextD === 0) {
        return 0;
    }

    let t = 0;
    let d;
    let v;
    let nextV = manhatten(a.v, b.v);
    let particle0 = a;
    let particle1 = b;

    do {
        d = nextD;
        v = nextV;
        particle0 = tick(particle0);
        particle1 = tick(particle1);
        t++;
        nextD = manhatten(particle0.p, particle1.p);

        if (nextD === 0) {
            return t;
        }

        nextV = manhatten(particle0.v, particle1.v);

        // Continue while the particles are moving together, or failing that,
        // the rate at which they're moving apart is slowing (indicating that
        // they will move toward each other in the future).
    } while (nextD < d || nextV < v);

    return null;
}
```

This implementation takes a pair of particles, and evolves both while either
they are approaching each other, or accelerating toward each other. If the two
particles are at zero distance during the evolution, they have collided. It
works, but it's slow.

All I really need is the location of each particle at a given time. Since the
particles move under a very simple set of rules, I _should_ be able to predict
where a particle will be at any time without needing to resort to loops. If I
can predict the location of two particles, I can calculate the relative location
of one particle with respect to another, and ultimately I can solve an equation
for which that location is the same (zero distance).

First I have to predict the location of a particle though. We are told that at
each time, the acceleration vector is added to the velocity vector, and then the
updated velocity vector is added to the position vector. The position of a
particle is thus (in one dimension, where zeros denote initial values):

$$
p_t = p_0 + v_0 t + a\sum_{n=0}^t n
$$

That sum can be swapped out for an expression (high schoolers will know this but
I, with the full weight of two degrees in physics, had forgotten and had to look
it up). This is equivalent:

$$
p_t = p_0 + v_0 t + a\frac{(t + 1)t}{2}
$$

Armed with this equation, I need to calculate the difference in position
between two particles:

$$
\Delta p_t = \Delta p_0 + \Delta v_0 t + \Delta a\frac{(t + 1)t}{2}
$$

Where the delta signifies a difference (the above is the equation of one
particle subtracted from the equation for a another particle). The solutions for
$t$ I want are when the left hand side (difference in position at time step $t$)
is zero. To avoid a division and retain integers as long as possible, I multiply
both sides by two and rewrite slightly to collect powers of $t$.

$$
0 = \Delta a t^2 + \left(2\Delta v_0 + \Delta a\right) t + 2\Delta p_0
$$

This is a [quadratic equation][4]! When the acceleration is zero this collapses
down to a linear equation with the solution:

$$
t = -\frac{\Delta p_0}{\Delta v_0}
$$

When acceleration is non-zero, I have to solve a quadratic equation:

$$
t = \frac{-b\pm\sqrt{b^2-4ac}}{2a}
$$

where

$$
\begin{align*}
a &= \Delta a \\
b &= 2\Delta v_0 + \Delta a \\
c &= 2\Delta p_0
\end{align*}
$$

I'm interested in solutions which are [natural numbers][5] (real positive
integers). To get natural number solutions to quadratic equations, I wrote these
functions:

```javascript
function isNaturalNumber(num) {
    return num >>> 0 === num;
}

// Provides only solutions which are natural numbers.
function solveQuadratic(a, b, c) {
  if (a === 0) {
    const solution = -c / b;

    return isNaturalNumber(solution) ? [solution] : [];
  }

  const rootDiscriminant = Math.sqrt(b * b - 4 * a * c);

  return [
    (-b + rootDiscriminant) / (2 * a),
    (-b - rootDiscriminant) / (2 * a)
  ].filter(isNaturalNumber);
}
```

The function `isNaturalNumber` uses the right bit shift operator. This is a
trick to get an integer out of a number. Positive numbers will be floored,
negative numbers will overflow (become large positive integers), and `NaN` will
become zero. Only positive integers will pass the strict equality check.
`solveQuadratic` itself encodes the solution to both the linear case
(acceleration of zero) and the quadratic case. JavaScript is on our side here
with how it represents numbers.

This solution is in one dimension. For collisions in three dimensions, this
equation must be solved for each, and only when all three dimensions have a
solution which is the same can I say that the two particles are projected to
collide. At last, here is the improved implementation of `collisionTime`:

```javascript
function collisionTime(a, b) {
    let commonSolutions;

    // Calculate the solutions for each axis and initialise or whittle down
    // commonSolutions.
    for (let i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
        const dp = a.p[i] - b.p[i];
        const dv = a.v[i] - b.v[i];
        const da = a.a[i] - b.a[i];

        const axisSolutions = solveQuadratic(da, 2 * dv + da, 2 * dp);

        // Most of the time there are no solutions, so this is a good
        // optimisation.
        if (axisSolutions.length === 0) {
          return null;
        }

        if (!commonSolutions) {
            // Initialise the set with solutions for the first axis.
            commonSolutions = new Set(axisSolutions);
        } else {
            // Remove solutions for other axes which this axis does't have.
            for (const solution of commonSolutions) {
                if (!axisSolutions.includes(solution)) {
                    commonSolutions.delete(solution);
                }
            }
        }

        // If the set of common solutions is ever empty, there will be no
        // collision.
        if (commonSolutions.size === 0) {
            return null;
        }
    }

    // I only want the earliest collision.
    return Math.min(...commonSolutions);
}
```

This function first calculates solutions for the x-axis. Solutions which are not
in common with both the y-axis and z-axis are subsequently removed. If the set
of common solutions is ever empty, the function returns `null`. If any axis has
no solutions I can take a shortcut and immediately return `null`. If the set has
remaining entries, these represent times when the particles will occupy the same
coordinates in all three dimensions (a collision). The lowest (earliest) is
plucked out as the solution!

On my machine, the naïve implementation takes ~3.2 seconds with the input I'm
given. With the improved implementation, it takes less than 0.1 seconds. The
full solution can be found [in this gist][6].

[1]: https://adventofcode.com
[2]: /blog/tip-arrayfrom
[3]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Set
[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quadratic_equation
[5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_number
[6]: https://gist.github.com/qubyte/d43432e0e1716bc5efca4426ee762071
