---
{
  "datetime": "2019-10-12T01:30:00Z",
  "updatedAt": null,
  "draft": false,
  "title": "Dark mode",
  "description": "After more than a year of saying I would I finally added a dark mode.",
  "tags": [
    "AboutThisBlog",
    "CSS"
  ]
}
---
That's right! After more than a year of talking about adding a dark mode I
finally did it. The wider support for
[`prefers-color-scheme`][prefers-color-scheme] is what pushed me over the edge.
I'm also a slave to fashion.

Initially I wanted to create a sort of dark-mode-battenberg theme, but after a
while using dark mode site I came to realise that my favourites are the ones
which use as much black as possible. It's becoming more common to see OLED
screens in the wild, and these use less energy for black pixels since OLED
pixels are self illuminating. I settled on using black for the background, and
borrowing my light mode background colour for text and borders.

The additions to the CSS aren't too dramatic, but I learnt a few things along
the way

```css
@media (prefers-color-scheme: dark) {
  :root {
    --background-color-main: #000;
    --background-color-alt: #000;
    --standout-color-main: hsl(
      var(--base-background-hue),
      var(--base-background-sat),
      var(--base-background-lum)
    );
    --standout-color-alt: hsl(
      calc(var(--base-background-hue) - 30),
      var(--base-background-sat),
      var(--base-background-lum)
    );
  }

  img:not([src*=".svg"]) {
    filter: brightness(.8) contrast(1.2);
  }

  pre {
    background-color: #000;
  }

  code {
    filter: invert();
  }
}

body > header {
  z-index: 1; /* works around stacking context issue introduced by filters */
}
```

The media query applies the content only when the OS is in dark mode and the
browser supports the media query. The `:root` swaps the background colors to
standout colours, and makes the background black.

Non-SVG images have their brightness and contrast adjusted with a filter. I
borrowed a dark mode filter from [Melanie Richards][melanie-richards] as
[suggested by Jeremy Keith][img-filter].

Code listings are more difficult. I plan to do a bit more on these later, but
for now, since the regular code is on a white background, I give dark mode code
containers a black background and apply an invert filter to the code.

Finally, the filters had an unintended side effect. Filters place the elements
they apply to above positioned elements in the stacking context, which led to
images and code listings scrolling above the nav bar (which is part of a sticky
positioned header). To address this issue I resorted to using `z-index`. While
the rule of thumb seems to be to avoid use of `z-index`, I believe it's
appropriate in this case.

[prefers-color-scheme]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@media/prefers-color-scheme
[melanie-richards]: https://melanie-richards.com/
[img-filter]: https://adactio.com/journal/15941
