---
{
  "datetime": "2019-10-21T16:20:00Z",
  "updatedAt": null,
  "draft": false,
  "title": "IndieWebCamp Brighton 2019",
  "description": "I attended IndieWebCamp Brighton and learnt a huge amount. Here's some stuff I learnt and built at it.",
  "tags": [
    "AboutThisBlog",
    "glitch",
    "WebServices",
    "IndieWeb"
  ]
}
---
I had a great time last weekend at IndieWebCamp (IWC) Brighton. The first day
was [filled with discussions][schedule] on various IndieWeb related topics. I
attended discussions on:

 - How IndieWebCamp should respond to the climate crisis.
 - Storage and display of personal tracking data.
 - _Local first_ web and how to define the term.
 - License detection.
 - Integrating Apple shortcuts (scripts) into your IndieWeb workflows.

Outcomes were interesting for some of these. For the first there was discussion
around downplaying more carbon intensive modes of transport, and attending
IWC before or after another event to make journeys more worthwhile (this is
already often the case). Another idea was to estimate the greenhouse gas output
of travel to and from IWC for all attendees, but there was disagreement over how
to measure this when attending other events too.

Storage and display of tracking data was interesting, but perhaps less relevant
to me. I'm not so interested in tracking where I go, my weight, and so forth,
though that might change in the future. The discussion eventually focussed on
how data should be summarized.

The local first discussion was one I was note taking for. I'm using my old
MacBook Air since I just finished a job and haven't started my new one yet, so
I'm between work laptops. The MBA is nearly 10 years old and still going strong,
but it has a Japanese keyboard layout, and after being on a British layout for
the last few years my ability to touch type is a little hampered. I mostly
managed to keep up but missed the discussion since my focus was on taking notes.
Where local first seems to shine is in content creation. For example, I could
write a post or a note on a train with bad mobile coverage, and my device would
stash the content and POST it whenever it next connects. [Jeremy Keith][jeremy]
mentioned [background sync][background-sync] as an emerging option to do this (I
must look into this).

License detection was interesting. There was some discussion over whether a
microformat would be the right option, or a rel-bookmark style rel, since in
that unusual case the rel isn't singular in a page. The latter has a potentially
confusing resolution algorithm though. The issue of actually parsing licenses
was avoided. We were mostly concerned with how to use multiple licenses within
a page.

The final session on the day was about integrating micropub with Apple
shortcuts. I found this extremely interesting. I'd considered it in passing, but
[Rosemary Orchard][rose] had a comprehensive set of actions to automate
IndieAuth and posting to [micropub][micropub] endpoints. This would be the
inspiration for my hack day work.

The second day was for hacking on your own stuff, and helping each other out
when possible. My [Node.js][node] knowledge came in handy a few times so I was
glad to be helpful!

I decided to update this blog to handle likes and replies. At the time of
writing you can see these as their own sections in the navigation bar. I am
considering collecting everything into a single filterable stream though, so
these may eventually go away. Likes and replies are created by
[my micropub endpoint][endpoint], so the first part of this task was to update
that glitch to understand and handle payloads of those kinds. As with notes and
links/bookmarks, it uses the [GitHub contents API][contents] to create JSON
files which are compiled to pages of my site. My static site generator gained
a couple more templates to render these new types of content.

This made it possible to post likes and replies using existing micropub clients.
I use [Omnibear][omnibear] as a Firefox extension in my laptop browser. This
client uses the current page to fill in details to make creating likes and
replies much simpler. On mobile, I decided that a new set of shortcuts to be
used from the sharing panel in iOS/iPadOS. Like Omnibear, these benefit from
the context they're used in. What I implemented is fairly primitive. The
shortcuts only use the URL of the current page. There's no elegant way to get
hold of the title of a page like Omnibear can, but I'll work on this later as an
enhancement.

I implemented shortcuts for liking, replying, and bookmarking. The latter two
prompt me for additional text for my part of the reply or bookmark. I decided
not to make these shortcuts use IndieAuth. Instead I updated my glitch to accept
authentication using a shared secret when a special `short-circuit-auth` header
is truthy. This means that existing clients continue to use IndieAuth, while my
own software can take a shortcut if I so choose. I might revisit this in the
future.

I'm enjoying the fruits of my work on the second day already. Likes and replies
are more social than the notes and bookmarks I had previously, so I hope this
leads to more interaction with other IndieWeb folk.

With micropub fresh in my mind, I may enhance my micropub endpoint to accept
multipart bodies. This allows POSTS with media in to be sent all in one request
which shortcuts can make use of. Then I'll be able to post pictures and not just
walls of text!

[schedule]: https://indieweb.org/2019/Brighton/Schedule
[jeremy]: https://adactio.com
[background-sync]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/SyncManager
[rose]: https://rosemaryorchard.com/
[micropub]: https://indieweb.org/Micropub
[node]: https://nodejs.org/
[endpoint]: https://glitch.com/~micropub-server
[contents]: https://developer.github.com/v3/repos/contents/
[omnibear]: https://omnibear.com/
