---
{
  "datetime": "2020-10-09T21:45:00Z",
  "updatedAt": null,
  "title": "Custom markdown blocks with marked",
  "description": "I use marked to do the markdown rendering for this blog. A recent feature makes it possible to create custom block types with a little hacking. In this post I show you how!",
  "tags": [
    "AboutThisBlog",
    "JavaScript"
  ]
}
---
I use [`marked`][marked] to do the markdown rendering for this blog. A recent
feature makes it possible to create custom block types with a little hacking. In
this post I show you how!

I'll be using mathematics ([TeX][tex]) blocks for my example. The `marked` setup
code looks like this:

```javascript
marked.use({
  walkTokens(token) {
    // Modify paragraph blocks beginning and ending with $$.
    if (type === 'paragraph' && raw.startsWith('$$\n') && raw.endsWith('\n$$')) {
      token.type = 'code';
      token.lang = 'mathematics';
      token.text = token.raw.slice(3, -3); // Removed the $$ boundaries.
      token.tokens.length = 0; // Remove child tokens.
    }
  },
  renderer: {
    code(code, language) {
      // Use custom mathematics renderer.
      if (language === 'mathematics') {
        return renderMathematics(code);
      }

      // Use default code renderer.
      return false;
    }
  }
});
```

I'm passing two things to `marked` to configure it here. The first is a
[token walker function][walk-token], which is the recent feature which makes
this all possible. It is called for each token, traversing the children of a
token before it progresses to its siblings (so it's sort of depth first).

The idea is for blocks of text with a `$$` above and below them to be handled
as mathematics. To a person this looks like a fenced code block with two dollar
symbols in the place of the three backticks. For example:

```markdown
Some example text with some mathematics to render below:

$$
a^2 = b^2 + c^2
$$

Some example text below.
```

It's a common extension to place LaTeX code inside `$$` delimited blocks.
Even if you're not familiar, the dollar symbols above and below are a little
like a fenced code block. To `marked` the block looks like a paragraph. This
means that the token walker will receive some paragraph tokens which need to be
modified.

To know the difference, paragraph tokens are checked by the token walker to see
if they begin with `$$\n` and end with `\n$$`. When they do, the block is
modified to look like a code block with a special `'markdown'` language. Child
tokens are removed because the content shouldn't be treated as markdown, and the
text property is set by snipping the leading and trailing dollars symbols and
newlines off.

The second part of this trick is in the renderer option. The renderer for code
blocks is modified with special handling for the `'mathematics'` language. The
code parameter received by it is the text we set on the token, so it's ready to
be rendered to mathematics. The rendering itself is beyond the scope of this
post, but I use [MathJax][mathjax]. When code is of any other language the
custom code renderer returns `false` to instruct `marked` to use the default
code rendering behaviour.

[tex]: https://tug.org/
[marked]: https://marked.js.org
[walk-tokens]: https://marked.js.org/using_pro#walk-tokens
[mathjax]: https://www.mathjax.org/
