---
{
  "datetime": "2022-05-28T13:00:00+01:00",
  "updatedAt": "2022-07-09T16:05:00+01:00",
  "draft": false,
  "title": "It's time to build a study habit",
  "description": "I was in a Japanese conversation group at work, and while I could follow the conversation I was unable to contribute. It's time (again) to form a study habit to push my spoken ability toward N3 level.",
  "tags": [
    "japanese"
  ]
}
---
I started a new role recently, and the company is large enough that there are a
number of folk learning or proficient in Japanese as a second language.

I joined a chat session with two other people whose Japanese was much further
along than mine. It was great listening practice (I could mostly follow the
conversation) but I was unable to contribute, which I found disappointing.

I've said it so many times in the past, but I really need to build a study habit
which is substantial enough to improve my proficiency, but light enough that I
can sustain it. Not just flash cards too.

All this is complicated by the little one. Evenings are complicated by his
dinner/bath/bedtime routine, which can be exhausting. Mornings are more open,
but that time needs to be carved out of my existing routine... I could make that
work.

Sometimes it should be book work. I stalled on Genki II because there are holes
in my basic Japanese from stop-start learning over such a long time. I might
pick up Genki I and do one or two morning sessions a week with it.

Other times I think I should read some manga. Two I've been meaning to start
reading which I think may work are {ja:よつばと!} and {ja:しろくまカフェ}. They're
gentle and humorous stories which I think will work well as spring becomes
summer here. I also have some graded readers on the shelf I can start on.

Of course, these are still not speaking, but I hope that if I can improve on
reading and consuming a wider variety of discourse than just set phrases I stand
a better chance of finding the words and phrases I need to contribute in the
Japanese chat sessions.

## Update (2022-07-09)

To prove that I'm not just talking crap, it's time for an update!

Since I wrote the above post, I've subscribed to [WaniKani], and bought three
volumes of each of the manga I mentioned above. I'm reading {ja:よつばと!} first
because it's a little more accessible at my level (and I'm really enjoying it,
even if I am looking forward to {ja:しろくまカフェ}). I spend 30-60 minutes
each week on a Saturday or Sunday reading, and I intend to build that up to
more.

I've found WaniKani to be especially effective. Over the years (decades?) I've
tried a lot of flash card apps and approaches, but avoided WaniKani since my
kanji wasn't too bad and I didn't want to spend a disproportionate amount of
effort on it at the cost of time I could have put into other study. In
hindsight, this was a mistake. The approach WaniKani takes is designed
specifically for Japanese, and also includes relevant vocabulary. I can already
tell it's helping me as I read manga.

To hold myself to account I'm logging my [study sessions]. I'm only logging
sessions over about 10 minutes. Lots of WaniKani review sessions come in under
that bar.

[WaniKani]: https://www.wanikani.com
[study sessions]: /study-sessions/
