---
{
  "datetime": "2022-05-15T10:55:00+01:00",
  "updatedAt": null,
  "draft": false,
  "title": "Marqdown",
  "description": "I've added so many tweaks and extensions to the markdown flavour I use for this site now that I've decided to document them, and give the whole a name.",
  "tags": [
    "AboutThisBlog",
    "IndieWeb"
  ]
}
---
Markdown is the standard for writing in techie circles these days, but
it's pretty minimal. For a readme it's all you need, but if you create a site
around Markdown you pretty quickly bump into its limitations. Markdown is
_deliberately_ limited, so it's no fault of the language or its creator!

Nevertheless, over time I've added my own tweaks and extensions upon Markdown,
so I've decided to document them, and give it a name (Marqdown). Naming may seem
a little arrogant, but it's mostly to disambiguate what I'm writing with more
common Markdown variants.

My variant is based on the default configuration provided by [marked], with
additions layered on top. This is mostly the original flavour of Markdown with
a few deviations to fix broken behaviour. As I add features I'll document them
in this post.

## Footnotes

I use footnotes[^][sparingly] from time to time. The way I've implemented
them makes the superscript a link to the footnote text, and the footnote text
itself has a backlink to the superscript, so you can jump back to where you
were.

The footnote in the previous paragraph was encoded like:

```plaintext
I use footnotes[^][sparingly] from time to time.
```

This was an interesting feature to implement because it produces content out of
the regular flow of the document. The markdown engine had to be abused a bit to
create the superscript links first and keep a list of their footnote texts. Once
the document is rendered, a post-render routine checks for any footnote texts,
and when there's at least one it appends a section with an ordered list of
footnotes. Another complication is index pages. For the blog posts
[index page](/blog) only the first paragraph of each post is used, and footnote
superscripts have to be removed from those.

## Languages

HTML supports language attributes. Most of the time a (well-built) page will
have a single language attribute on the opening `<html>` tag itself, setting
the language for the entire document.

I write notes in mixed English and Japanese as I learn the latter. When working
with CJK languages it's particularly important to give elements containing text
in one of those languages the appropriate language tag so that Chinese
characters are [properly rendered][cjk-render] (there are divergences which
are important).

I wrote a Markdown syntax extension to add these tags. Since my documents are
mostly in English, this remains as the language attribute of each page as a
whole. For snippets of Japanese I use the syntax extension, which looks like:

```plaintext
The text between here {ja:今日は} and here is in Japanese.
```

This snippet renders to:

```html
<p>
  The text between here <span lang="ja">今日は</span> and here is in Japanese.
</p>
```

Simple enough. The span is unavoidable because there is only text within it and
text surrounding it. Where the renderer gets smart is in eliminating the span!
If the span is the only child of its parent, the renderer eliminates the span by
moving the language attribute to the parent. For example:

```plaintext
- English
- {ja:日本語}
- English
```

migrates the language attribute to the parent `<li>` to eliminate a span:

```html
<ul>
  <li>English</li>
  <li lang="ja">日本語</li>
  <li>English</li>
</ul>
```

Similarly, the renderer is smart enough to see when the span has only one child,
and can move the language attribute to the child to eliminate the span. Example:

```plaintext
{ja:_すごい_}
```

migrates the language attribute to the spans only child, an `<em>`:

```html
<em lang="ja">すごい</em>
```

This becomes particularly important in the case of my notes, where it's common
to nest ruby elements inside these language wrappers. There's a ruby annotation
in the next section, and you'll see the language attributes appear directly
on the ruby element if you inspect it.

As with footnotes, the language attribute migration and spam elimination is
handled using JSDOM _after_ a markdown document is rendered as part of a
post-render routine. In the future I may look into adapting marked to render
directly to JSDOM rather than to a string.

## Ruby annotations

I'm studying Japanese. It's pretty common to see annotations to help with the
pronunciation of words containing Chinese characters. This could be because the
text is intended for learners like me, but it's also common to see it for less
common words, or where the reading of a word may be ambiguous.

These annotations typically look like kana rendered above or below the word
(when Japanese is written left-to-right), or to one side (when Japanese is
written from top to bottom). Ruby annotations are not unique to Japanese, but in
the Japanese context they're called
[{ja:^振,ふ,り,,仮名,がな^} (furigana)][furigana], and you can see them right here
in the Japanese text in this sentence! The code for it looks like this:

```plaintext
^振,ふ,り,,仮名,がな^
```

The delimiters are the carets, odd elements are regular text, and even elements
are their annotations. So, {ja:ふ} goes above {ja:振}, nothing goes above {ja:り}
(it's already a kana character), and {ja:がな} goes above {ja:仮名}.

There are actually [specific elements][ruby] for handling ruby annotations, so
what you see rendered is only from HTML and CSS! They're pretty fiddly to work
with manually though, so this extension saves me a lot of time and saves me from
lots of broken markup.

## Highlighted text

The syntax of this extension is borrowed from elsewhere (I didn't invent it).
This addition allows me to wrap stuff in `<mark>` elements. By default, this
is a bit like using a highlighter pen on text. The syntax looks like:

```plaintext
Boring ==important== boring again.
```

which renders to:

```html
<p>
  Boring <mark>important</mark> boring again.
</p>
```

which looks like:

> Boring ==important== boring again.

This is another extension I use heavily in my language notes to emphasize the
important parts of grammar notes.

## Fancy maths

Now and then I do a post with some equations in. I could render these elsewhere,
but I like to keep everything together for source control. Add to that, I want
to render the maths statically to avoid client side rendering (and all the JS
I'd have to include to do that).

I settled on another common markdown extension to do this, which is to embed
LaTeX code. The previous extensions are all inline, whereas maths blocks are
blocks. I use [MathJax] to render LaTeX within the maths blocks to SVG. The
resultant SVG has some inline style and unnecessary attributes stripped out,
and a title and title added with an `aria-labelledby` to point to the title for
accessibility purposes.

This:

```plaintext
$$
x = \frac{-b \pm \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a}
$$
```

Results in:

$$
x = \frac{-b \pm \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a}
$$

Nice, right? If you hover over it a tooltip will show you the original LaTeX
code. I haven't figured out inline maths snippets yet.

[marked]: https://marked.js.org/
[cjk-render]: https://heistak.github.io/your-code-displays-japanese-wrong/
[ruby]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/ruby
[MathJax]: https://www.mathjax.org/
[furigana]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Furigana
