---
{
  "datetime": "2023-01-30T09:05:00Z",
  "updatedAt": null,
  "draft": false,
  "title": "Tip: Find and type narrow an element from an array in ruby and sorbet",
  "description": "Getting the first or last element of an array in ruby can require some acrobatics to keep sorbet happy, but once you know how it's easy!",
  "tags": [
    "ruby",
    "sorbet"
  ]
}
---
Recently I had a problem where I had to find the first matching element of an
array by type. Ruby provides a method to return the first matching (or `nil`)
element in an array, but sorbet isn't smart enough to type narrow it when the
match is related to the type of the element.

For illustrative purposes, here's a function which takes an array of strings
and integers, and returns the first string element lowercased, or `nil` when no
strings are in the array. My first try looked like this:

```ruby
sig do
  params(
    maybe_strings: T::Array[T.any(String, Integer)]
  ).returns(
    T.nilable(String)
  )
end
def find_first_and_lower(maybe_strings)
  first = maybe_strings.find { |x| x.is_a?(String) }

  # Sorbet thinks that first is 
  # `T.nilable(T.any(String, Integer))`,
  # so this doesn't work because Integer
  # has no `downcase` method.
  first&.downcase
end
```

This unfortunately doesn't work. The code is fine, but sorbet doesn't (at the
time of writing) understand that the type of `first` should be
`T.nilable(String)`, so it thinks the last line of the function is incorrect.

My next attempt was to manually iterate through the array:

```ruby
sig do
  params(
    maybe_strings: T::Array[T.any(String, Integer)]
  ).returns(
    T.nilable(String)
  )
end
def find_first_and_lower(maybe_strings)
  maybe_strings.each do |s|
    return s.downcase if s.is_a?(String)
  end
  nil
end
```

This works! It's pretty ugly though. The only good thing going for it is that it
stops iterating through the array once the string is found (like `find`). To
folk new to ruby (me) the `return` applying to the function as a whole and not
just the block was jarring too...

In the end I [used `filter_map` again][filter_map], which encodes most of the
behaviour I want:

```ruby
sig do
  params(
    maybe_strings: T::Array[T.any(String, Integer)]
  ).returns(
    T.nilable(String)
  )
end
def find_first_and_lower(maybe_strings)
  first = maybe_strings
    .filter_map { |x| x if x.is_a?(String) }
    .first

  first&.downcase
end
```

This works too! It's not _quite_ ideal though, because the `filter_map` will
build us a whole new array when we only want the first (if any) element. That's
why I've kept the `downcase` outside the `filter_map`. The solution was to
make the `filter_map` lazy:

```ruby
sig do
  params(
    maybe_strings: T::Array[T.any(String, Integer)]
  ).returns(
    T.nilable(String)
  )
end
def find_first_and_lower(maybe_strings)
  first = maybe_strings
    .lazy
    .filter_map { |x| x.downcase if x.is_a?(String) }
    .first
end
```

I've moved the `downcase` call into the `filter_map` now because it looks a
little cleaner, and it will only apply to the first found element.

Bonus: How about getting the _last_ matching element? While there's a `.last`
method I could use, I don't want to iterate over the whole array to get to it.
It turns out that `reverse_each` returns an enumerator when it's called without
a block:

```ruby
sig do
  params(
    maybe_strings: T::Array[T.any(String, Integer)]
  ).returns(
    T.nilable(String)
  )
end
def find_first_and_lower(maybe_strings)
  first = maybe_strings
    .reverse_each
    .lazy
    .filter_map { |x| x.downcase if x.is_a?(String) }
    .first
end
```

Otherwise, the solution looks the same, and like the one for the first element
it only looks at as many entries (from the end of the array this time) as it
needs.

[sorbet]: https://sorbet.org
[filter_map]: /blog/tip-type-narrowing-arrays-for-sorbet-in-ruby
