---
{
  "datetime": "2024-11-25T02:15:00Z",
  "title": "How I syndicate links and notes to Bluesky with GitHub Actions",
  "garden": true,
  "description": "How I syndicate my links and notes to Bluesky, using the Bluesky API with GitHub Actions and Node.js.",
  "tags": [
    "IndieWeb",
    "Bluesky"
  ]
}
---

Inspired by [Jeremy's post on how he syndicates to Bluesky][adactio-bluesky], I
thought I'd follow suit (many examples are useful when it comes to API
integration work). A disclaimer though... I'm dubious of the long term prospects
of Bluesky for reasons I won't go into here. That being said, it's currently
a vibrant place, and [syndicating from my site to other places][posse] keeps my
content[^][I dislike the "content" term, but I can't think of something better
which encompasses writing and media.] in my hands.


My setup is a bit of a Rube Goldberg machine:

- I publish notes (optionally with a photo) and bookmarks using [Micropub]
  endpoints.
- The endpoints add the note or bookmark as a [JF2] JSON file to the [git
  repository of my personal site on GitHub][repo].
- A [GitHub Actions workflow][workflow] is triggered by the addition of a note
  or bookmark.
- The workflow calls a Node.js script. It calls the script using my Bluesky
  handle, which is `qubyte.codes` for me, and an [app password]. Do _not_ use
  your actual password! Bluesky makes it pretty easy to create an
  [app password], and when you have one you can add it as a secret for Actions
  to use at the `./settings/secrets/actions` path of your repo site. I've called
  my secret `BLUESKY_APP_PASSWORD`.

The rest of this post is about [the script itself][script]. As a rule of thumb,
I keep bits of shell glue in Actions workflows, and store the bulk of any logic
in a discrete script. That makes it easy to call the script by hand for testing.

I publish notes (optionally with an image) and bookmarks using [Micropub]
endpoints. The note or bookmark is added as a [JF2] JSON file to the [git
repository of my personal site on GitHub][repo]. When such a file is created
there, a [GitHub Actions workflow][workflow] is triggered, and this workflow
in turn calls a Node.js script.

The script is a vanilla Node.js script. While Bluesky does provide API client
libraries, I didn't find it necessary to use one. I managed to write this
without any third party libraries. API work is all achieved with plain old
`fetch`.

There are a couple of local libraries which I've extracted into their own
modules. The first is `blueskyAuth`, which looks like this:

```javascript
const createSessionUrl = 'https://bsky.social/xrpc/com.atproto.server.createSession';

export default async function blueskyAuth(handle, appPassword) {
  const res = await fetch(createSessionUrl, {
    headers: { 'content-type': 'application/json' },
    method: 'POST',
    body: JSON.stringify({ identifier: handle, password: appPassword })
  });

  if (!res.ok) {
    throw new Error(
      `Bluesky responded with an unexpected status: ${res.status} ${await res.text()}`
    );
  }

  return res.json(); // { accessJwt, refreshJwt, did }
}
```

Bluesky mostly speaks JSON, which is convenient when working in Node.js. To
create a session with Bluesky, you JSON encode an object containing your handle
and an app password. If successful, the response contains three things of
interest:

- `accessJwt`: A short-lived token used for API requests.
- `refreshJwt`: A token which can be exchanged for a new `accessJwt` and
  `refreshJwt` when the `accessJwt` expires.
- `did`: An identifier. The initial "d"[^][Unintentional reference to the racing
  manga.] stands for "distributed", but I recently discovered that the DID `plc`
  method used by Bluesky is not actually distributed at all, thanks to Christine
  Lemmer-Webber's [excellent article on Bluesky and decentralization][CLM]. I
  _highly_ recommend reading it to dispel some myths around how decentralized
  Bluesky is, by design.

My script uses the `accessJwt` as a token and the `did` as an identifier in
API requests. Since the session is only needed to post one document (and
possibly an image), there's no need to think about refreshing the token, so I
don't use the `refreshJwt`.

The rest of the script is about one or two API requests. When an image is to be
uploaded, that happens first. There's not much to say here beyond the size
restrictions being quite low, and being constrained to JPEGs and PNGs. I don't
think they're doing much processing of images, so I recommend removing metadata
from image uploads. The response of the image upload contains a `blob` field,
which is used as a reference to the image in the second API request in the form
of an _[embedding]_.

The final request creates the "record" (the note or bookmark) on Bluesky.
There's a lot to unpack here. The [_creating a post_][tutorial] is full of
useful samples to help figure out the anatomy of a record creation body.

One fascinating aspect of Bluesky is how text is composed. Rather than some sort
of markup language, it uses a more limited concept called _[rich text facets]_.
Text is linear, and facets (for example, links) are attached to UTF-8 byte
ranges of the text. This is awkward for many languages! For example, JavaScript
uses UTF-16 to represent string internally (as was the trend in the mid-'90s),
so the range of characters you get with naïve string work in JS will give you
incorrect offsets. Thankfully Node.js has the venerable `Buffer` class, which
can be used to represent strings as arrays of UTF-8 bytes. A `Buffer.byteLength`
is all it takes to get the UTF-8 size of a string.

Anyway, I've put lots of annotations in [the syndication script][script], so
hopefully it serves as a useful example!

[adactio-bluesky]: https://adactio.com/journal/21570
[posse]: https://indieweb.org/POSSE
[Micropub]: https://www.w3.org/TR/micropub/
[JF2]: https://jf2.spec.indieweb.org
[repo]: https://github.com/qubyte/qubyte-codes
[workflow]: https://github.com/qubyte/qubyte-codes/blob/main/.github/workflows/syndicate-to-bluesky.yml
[app password]: https://bsky.app/settings/app-passwords
[script]: https://github.com/qubyte/qubyte-codes/blob/main/scripts/syndicate-to-bluesky.js
[CLM]: https://dustycloud.org/blog/how-decentralized-is-bluesky/
[initial-d]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Initial_D
[embedding]: https://docs.bsky.app/docs/advanced-guides/posts#images-embeds
[tutorial]: https://docs.bsky.app/docs/tutorials/creating-a-post
[rich text facets]: https://docs.bsky.app/docs/advanced-guides/post-richtext
