---
{
  "datetime": "2026-02-06T11:45:00Z",
  "title": "What happened to 2025?",
  "garden": true,
  "description": "A post about what I did in 2025.",
  "tags": [
    "Personal"
  ]
}
---
I've not posted in over a year (the whole of 2025). I don't have a readership
(there are good odds that nobody besides me will read this), so nobody has
missed my writing and I've felt no pressure to force a post.

It _is_ unusual though. A handful of times in a typical year something will grab
my attention to the point that I take the time to write about it. So what was
different about 2025? And why write about it now?

In short, I was very busy:

- I started coming out as trans in late November 2024. Three people close to me
  by the end of the year.
- Over 2025 I came out to everyone else, and by the middle of April I was Aura
  (hello!) full time in all contexts.
- In late January 2025 I started on hormone replacement therapy (HRT) which
  means...
- I just passed the first full year on HRT (the anniversary which led me to
  write this post)!
- Lots, lots more related stuff (laser hair removal, electrolysis, clothes (I
  haven't boymoded[^][Boymoding is wearing masculine clothing and presenting in
  a masculine way.] since April) legal stuff and ID, etc.).

The year was _a lot_[^][All that and a UK Supreme Court ruling and government
actively working to remove the human rights of trans folk in the UK.]. Each
trans person has their own path, and not all have access to or want HRT. For me
though, it was the most important step so far, to the point that I'm viewing it
like a birthday. In the years between realizing I'm trans and making the
decision to come out, I'd gone from the persistent feeling of wrongness and
disconnection I'd always had, to being in a very bad place. The decision to
transition was a necessary one, but the rewards astonishing. I'm healthier and
happier than I've ever been before. I'm still early in my journey, but I've come
_so far_.

So that's what happened in 2025, and why there's a gap in the blog posts. I
might expand on individual parts of my experience in future posts. I'm not
certain yet. While it's an extremely personal subject, every trans person's
path is different, and perhaps someone reading this will see something of
themselves which helps them. I wouldn't change my life so far (except skipping
the years between figuring it out and coming out), but I often wonder how things
might have been if I'd have read something like this and connected the dots
earlier.

If you're reading this, and your gender is on your mind,
[read this](https://genderdysphoria.fyi/en/am-i-trans)[^][I have thoughts on the
Egg Prime Directive and don't completely agree with it. There's a lot of good
information on that site though, and that page is a good place to start.]. If
we're acquainted, then you can talk to me, in confidence.
