---
datetime: "2016-12-24T17:00Z"
title: "Promises and Node.js event emitters don't mix"
description: "Node.js event emitters exhibit some unexpected behaviour, with error events in particular, which does not mix well with promises."
tags:
  - JavaScript
---
To many experienced Node developers, the title of this post will seem
intuitively obvious. Nevertheless, it's useful to see what unexpected behaviour
can occur when the two are used together. Here's an example:

```javascript
const { EventEmitter } = require('events');
const emitter = new EventEmitter();

Promise.reject(new Error('Oh noes!'))
  .catch(e => emitter.emit('error', e));
```

If you run this code (tested in Node v7.3 from a script, not REPL), what do you
expect to happen? I expected an `uncaughtException` event, since an event
emitter is emitting an [error event with no event handler][1], but that's not
what happens at all. Instead you get an `UnhandledPromiseRejectionWarning`!

This is bad news. If something genuinely nasty has happened, you might want to
emit an error like this which is either explicitly handled or causes an
`uncaughtException` event. Uncaught exceptions _should_ lead to the process
exiting, and a promise has just stifled it.

So, what happened? Here's a hint:

```javascript
const { EventEmitter } = require('events');
const emitter = new EventEmitter();

try {
  emitter.emit('error', new Error('Oh noes!'));
} catch (e) {
  console.log('caught');
}
```

What do you expect to happen here? Again, at first glance I would have expected
an `uncaughtException` event. `uncaughtException` events can happen when one of
two conditions is met. The first is an error is thrown but not caught (thus the
name). The second is when an error event is emitted and the emitter has no
handler to deal with it.

Did I say there were two conditions? I meant to say one! The second condition is
really the first in disguise. When an emitter lacks an error handler and it
emits an error event, the default error handler takes control and _throws_ the
error. Since event handlers are called synchronously upon event emissions, this:

```javascript
const { EventEmitter } = require('events');
const emitter = new EventEmitter();

emitter.emit('error', new Error('Oh noes!'));
```

is equivalent to

```javascript
throw new Error('Oh noes!');
```

So, the very first snippet is equivalent to:

```javascript
Promise.reject(new Error('Oh noes!'))
  .catch(e => {
    throw e;
  });
```

The promise chain captures the thrown error and wraps it as a rejected promise,
which leads to an `UnhandledPromiseRejectionWarning` since a second `.catch` is
needed in the chain to handle it.

If you want to ensure that unhandled error events lead to uncaught exceptions
which aren't captured by a `catch` or a promise chain, then you can wrap the
emission in a `setTimeout` or a `setImmediate`.

[1]: https://nodejs.org/dist/latest-v7.x/docs/api/events.html#events_error_events
