---
datetime: '2018-08-01T18:40:00Z'
title: Automatic announcement of new blog entries
description: >-
  I made a glitch to announce new blog entries! The mechanism is triggered by
  netlify successfully deploying, and glitch receiving a webhook and checking a
  sitemap for changes.
tags:
  - AboutThisBlog
  - glitch
---
It occurred to me a couple of days ago that it'd be neat to build a glitch to
announce new blog posts. Since I deploy this blog by pushing to a master branch
on GitHub, creation of a blog post is somewhat less obvious than when publishing
on a platform like wordpress or medium, so I needed to figure out another
approach.

As part of the build process this blog generates a sitemap. All blog entries
hang off of the `/blog` path, so it's not difficult to filter the sitemap down
to only blog entires. By comparing a sitemap before and after deployment, it's
possible to know when one or more entries have been added, and should be
tweeted!

Glitch is a natural fit for this. It gives you a little persistent storage (a
directory called `.data`), which can be used to stash the sitemap after each
time it gets triggered.

In depth...

## Step 1: Commits are pushed

As was the case before this enhancement, I push to deploy. This process starts
with me creating or editing a post, committing it, and then pushing it to the
master branch on GitHub.

GitHub then dispatches a notification to Netlify.

## Step 2: Netlify receives a notification

Netlify is configured to build and deploy the blog each time it gets a
notification from GitHub that the master branch has changed. It builds and
deploys the blog.

The new part is that a [notification][1] is configured to send a POST to glitch
when a deploy succeeds.

## Step 3: A glitch app receives a notification

I built [this glitch app][2] to receive and verify POSTs from Netlify. Netlify
uses a JSON web token, and validation is done by shared secret. When the request
is validated, its context (a field on the JSON body of the request) is checked.
This is so that only the production deploy is acted upon, and not branch
deploys.

For valid POSTs with a production context, the app makes a request for the
[sitemap][3] of this blog, and loads the previous sitemap from its
`.data` directory. Both are filtered down to only blog posts, and compared for
new entries. The new sitemap is saved in place of the old one.

Finally, each new blog post is formatted as a tweet, and posted to twitter!

## Lessons

While it's pretty cool to automate things using webhooks (glitch in particular
shines for this use-case), the thing which really stood out was how the sitemap
made it all fairly straight forward. Originally I added the sitemap almost as an
afterthought, since it was cheap to do with a template and is good for search
engines. I'm glad I made it a newline separated list rather than an XML
monstrosity because it's so easy to parse this way.

[1]: https://www.netlify.com/docs/webhooks/#outgoing-webhooks-and-notifications
[2]: https://glitch.com/~tweet-new-blog-posts
[3]: /sitemap.txt
