---
datetime: '2018-10-19T19:00:30Z'
updatedAt: null
title: Routes of RESTful services with nested resources
description: >-
  Nested resources are common, and REST has no obvious way of modelling them. In
  this post I describe compromise to address this problem.
tags:
 - WebServices
 - REST
---
Nested resources are common in real life, and when you're a programmer working
on RESTful APIs you may have noticed that there are often tradeoffs when it
comes to formatting the routes of nested resources.

Let's say we're building an API for carpenters. Their guild wants a way to help
the carpenters manage their clients, and the items which they're creating for
their clients (jobs). A set of routes for this might look like

```plain
GET  /carpenters
POST /carpenters
GET  /carpenters/:carpenterId

GET  /clients
POST /clients
GET  /clients/:clientId

GET  /jobs
POST /jobs
GET  /jobs/:jobId
```

where segments preceded by a colon are placeholders for a UUID. The first route
of each group gets a collection, the second creates a new member, and the third
gets a member by its ID. There may well be other operations like the third which
act on individual members of a collection, such as PUT for replacing and DELETE
for removal.

The problem with this layout is that, as a carpenter, you're rarely going to
want to see clients which aren't _your_ clients. There may also be lots of jobs,
and making a request for a list of jobs could select a huge number of them.
Usually you'll want to filter it by the client. We can use query parameters to
supply additional context, but this seems a bit clumsy. Let's have another go

```plain
GET  /carpenters
POST /carpenters
GET  /carpenters/:carpenterId

GET  /carpenters/:carpenterId/clients
POST /carpenters/:carpenterId/clients
GET  /carpenters/:carpenterId/clients/:clientId

GET  /carpenters/:carpenterId/clients/:clientId/jobs
POST /carpenters/:carpenterId/clients/:clientId/jobs
GET  /carpenters/:carpenterId/clients/:clientId/jobs/:jobId
```

It's pretty clear now that these are nested resources. It's no longer possible
to select a collection without refining it by its parent resources.

The problem now is that it's a bit annoying to have to use _all_ the parent IDs
of a list or a member. I recently realised (and I'm probably late to the party)
that a good solution is a compromise between the two

```plain
GET  /carpenters
POST /carpenters
GET  /carpenters/:carpenterId

GET  /carpenters/:carpenterId/clients
POST /carpenters/:carpenterId/clients
GET  /clients/:clientId

GET  /clients/:clientId/jobs
POST /clients/:clientId/jobs
GET  jobs/:jobId
```

In this arrangement, we need to use a route with a parent ID when listing a
resource or creating a new member. When we already have an ID of a resource we
don't need to include its parent in the path. This includes other singular
operations such as PUT and DELETE.

Finally, a word on nesting. The implicit assertion made above is that a child
resource has a single parent, which may not be the case. Think of the solution
above as a filtering mechanism. i.e. a client may have contracted more that one
carpenter. You may also want to list jobs for a carpenter, rather than for a
client. If you find yourself writing too many routes, using query parameters may
be the lesser evil. Be pragmatic!
