---
datetime: '2018-03-08T01:20Z'
title: Putting back the service worker
description: >-
  After a discussion with Jeremy Keith at a Brighton Homebrew Website Club
  session, he has me convinced to take another shot at implementing a service
  worker for qubyte.codes.
tags:
  - AboutThisBlog
---
In the [last post about this blog](/blog/about-this-blog-3) I wrote about why
I removed the service worker which made this blog a progressive web application.

The way my blog handles CSS predates the wide availability of service workers.
Since CSS link tags are blocking, it's good to give CSS a long cache time. In
order to do this, but still deliver fresh CSS without readers having to wait for
it, I give the CSS file a URI including a hash of its content. If the CSS
is updated, its URI changes, as does the `href` of the CSS link tag in each page
of this blog.

The server sends this header along with CSS it serves:

```http
Cache-Control: max-age=315360000, public, immutable
```

The `immutable` tells the browser the file will never change. The long `max-age`
is a fallback for browsers which don't support `immutable`. `public` lets any
proxies know that they can cache it too.

I instructed the browser not to cache HTML at all. Since the HTML was always
fresh, updated CSS would be loaded at most once on each change. The server
sends this header along with HTML:

```http
Cache-Control: no-cache
```

Which forces it to make a fresh request for HTML each time. These headers are
still in place now (even since the move to Netlify).

Unfortunately this didn't mesh well with the caching strategy of the service
worker I added. The worker would download the entire blog, HTML and CSS, the
first time a user navigated to it. The service worker was generated by
[sw-precache][sw-precache], which I had set up to be generated every time the
blog was updated. It worked out what to add and remove from its cache based on
file hashes. Since an update to CSS<sup>†</sup> meant changing the address in a
link header in every HTML page, it removed not only the CSS, but all the HTML
any time the CSS changed. Worse, it proactively downloaded all the updated
files.

The net effect was minor CSS changes triggering a mass download of my blog. This
wasn't a good use of server or browser resources, so I removed the worker.

I recently attended a [Homebrew Website Club][homebrew-website-club] held by
Jeremy Keith. By chance he'd written [a blog post][minimal-viable-sw] on this
issue the day before, in which he provides a _minimum viable service worker_.

This service worker caches everything lazily (no precache). When an HTML page is
requested, it always tries the network first for a fresh copy, and falls back to
the cache when necessary. For everything else it hits the cache first, but gets
an update via the network in the background.

This resolves the CSS issue very nicely. Old CSS and HTML will be cached, so if
your Southern Rail train is stuck in a tunnel, you can still read
[that blog entry about mixins](/blog/test-friendly-mixins) you saw earlier and
are now bored enough to take another look at. If you're stuck _outside_ of a
tunnel and I've updated the CSS<sup>‡</sup>, the request for fresh HTML will
succeed, which will also bring in and cache the fresh CSS! For things like
images, which will probably never change, this also works well. If a change is
urgent to any file, it can still be given a fresh URL to cache bust it (though I
doubt this'll ever be necessary).

I'll still need to do _some_ work though. As mentioned in that post, cleanup
isn't addressed. I'm happy for HTML to be cached indefinitely, but for the
CSS one way to clean it up might be to remove it once it is older than every
HTML entry in the cache. For particularly large resources such as images, a
relatively short cache time and good alt-text might be a good approach...

In the meantime, I've borrowed the service worker code from that post mostly
unchanged (most changes are just to align it with the style enforced by my
ESLint config). The one small addition is to allow server sent events
(`EventSource`) connections. I use these in development to hot-reload my blog
when changes are made. The original script ignores all but GET requests:

```javascript
if (request.method !== 'GET') {
  return;
}
```

I've extendded this to also ignore server sent event connections:

```javascript
const acceptHeader = request.headers.get('Accept');

if (request.method !== 'GET' || acceptHeader.includes('text/event-stream')) {
  return;
}
```

You can see the current service worker code I'm using [here](/sw.js).

<sup>†</sup> I had to add some CSS to handle superscripts, such as the one used
for this footnote.

<sup>‡</sup> Perhaps the blog will be a different shade of beige...

[homebrew-website-club]: https://indieweb.org/Homebrew_Website_Club
[minimal-viable-sw]: https://adactio.com/journal/13540
[sw-precache]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/sw-precache
