---
datetime: '2018-04-23T23:00:00Z'
title: Content-Security-Policy and service workers
description: >-
  I was recently tripped over by a subtlety in how service worker fetch events
  and fetch works in conjunction with content security policy.
tags:
  - AboutThisBlog
  - JavaScript
---
I was recently tripped over by a subtlety in how service worker fetch events
and fetch works in conjunction with content security policy (CSP). This happened
while adding an image to the [about](/about) page. This post is the result of
[a conversation I had with Jake Archibald][convo] on twitter (with thanks for
helping me to understand what was going on).

When I originally built this blog I set the content security policy (omitting
policies which aren't pertinent):

```http
Content-Security-Policy: default-src 'self'; img-src *;
```

This sets the policy for all requests to be limited to the same domain, except
for images which may come from anywhere. I set it like this since images may
come from a content delivery network (CDN). This means other domain names could
be used, even for my own images.

Until now this blog has had no images at all, so no issues with this content
security policy with respect to images were obvious.

When I added an image the browser refused to load it. Firefox wasn't much help
here, but Chrome gave me a useful error message in the console (the URL is
omitted for brevity):

```plain
Refused to connect to '<URL>' because it violates the following Content Security Policy directive: "default-src 'self'". Note that 'connect-src' was not explicitly set, so 'default-src' is used as a fallback.
```

This error was being thrown from a fetch performed by the service worker. With
the worker bypassed, the image loaded as expected. The error above was trying to
tell me that the request for the image within the worker was happening under
a different security policy to that expected. Specifically, the worker is using
the `connect-src` policy when performing the request for the image, and not the
`image-src` policy I expected. `connect-src` is the policy used by _scripts_
making requests. Since I don't define a `connect-src` policy, the fallback is
`default-src`, which is limited to the domain of the site, and does not allow an
image to be downloaded from a CDN.

There is a quick solution, which is to add a `connect-src *;` policy. By
limiting this policy to the service worker, no other scripts will get to make
requests to anywhere. The Netlify config for this looks like:

```toml
[[headers]]
  for = "/sw.js"
  [headers.values]
    Content-Security-Policy = "connect-src *;"
```

But what's actually going on here? I was confused because I had expected
the fetch performed inside the worker to be subject to the `image-src` policy.
I even checked that the [initiator][initiator] and [destination][destination] of
the request in the fetch event handler were for an image.

The fetch event and handler look something like the following:

```javascript
addEventListener('fetch', fetchEvent => {
  const responseFromFetch = fetch(fetchEvent.request);

  // Other stuff omitted...
});
```

I'm effectively proxying the request. I've omitted a bunch of stuff to do with
caching.

When fetch is called with a request object, the URL of the request is used to
make an entirely [new request before processing][new-req] it. This new request
lacks information about the initiator and destination, and so it is subject to
the `connect-src` policy.

This seemed bad to me at first. CSP being different with and without a service
worker would be bad because you'd have to test both each time a new resource
type is added.

Fortunately, it turns out that the browser also performs CSP checks on the
request _before_ the service worker receives the fetch event and on the response
it receives from the service worker (important if the worker changes a URL,
which I'm not doing). Restating for the example of an image, these three checks
are made:

 - The initial request for is checked for `image-src` violation.
 - A request with the same URL is checked in the  service worker for `connect-src` violation.
 - The response from the service worker is checked for `image-src` violation.

This means that I'm safe with the `connect-src *;` policy for the service worker
mentioned above, since the browser was already applying the `image-src` policy
to image requests before the service worker saw them!

[convo]: https://twitter.com/jaffathecake/status/988402162312114177
[initiator]: https://fetch.spec.whatwg.org/#concept-request-initiator
[destination]: https://fetch.spec.whatwg.org/#concept-request-destination
[new-req]: https://fetch.spec.whatwg.org/#fetch-method
