---
{
  "datetime": "2019-01-01T23:30:00Z",
  "updatedAt": "2019-04-22T13:40:00Z",
  "title": "Parsing input from stdin to structures in Rust",
  "description": "I've been doing the Advent of Code challenges again this year, but this time in Rust. As a sort of meta-challenge, I spent some time working out how to read and parse input from stdin.",
  "tags": [
    "rust"
  ]
}
---
I've been working on this post for a while, but about a month ago my firstborn
arrived, and he's been getting the lion's share of my attention. I start work
again tomorrow, so I decided to just publish this post and be done with it.
Apologies if it's a little rough around the edges!

In a post a while back I described in depth my solution to an
[Advent of Code][1] challenge. This year I took part again, but rather than
using Node.js to write programs to solve challenges I decided to use Rust.

The input for these challenges fell into one of three broad categories; input
short enough to provide as an argument to the solver program, longer input as
a single line in a file, and input over many lines in a file. In the last case,
each line usually represents an individual structure of some kind in a
collection. In all cases, I chose to keep the input separate. I'll be focussing
on how I approached the last case for this article.

Rust has excellent IO support, but parsing of strings into structures is more
difficult than for a language like JavaScript. As a meta-challenge, I found
parsing input interesting, and I learnt a lot about iterators, the `Option` and
`Result` types, and type casting in the process. I'll use the challenge of
[day 10][5] for illustrative purposes.

To be unix-y, I decided to read input from stdin rather than reading from a
file.

```shell
cargo run < input.txt
```

On day 10 the data looked like

```plaintext
position=<-10427, -42253> velocity=< 1,  4>
position=< 21343,  42515> velocity=<-2, -4>
position=<-10417, -52846> velocity=< 1,  5>
```

Each line represents what I will call a particle, including its initial position
and velocity.

Rust ships with some nice functionality for working with input from stdin. The
`main` function for my solution to Day 10 looks like

```rust
use std::io::{stdin, BufRead};

// ...

fn main() {
  let mut particles: Vec<Particle> = stdin()
    .lock()
    .lines()
    .filter_map(|line_result| line_result.ok()) // #1
    .filter_map(|line| line.parse().ok())       // #2
    .collect();                                 // #3

  // use particles
}
```

I like the readability of this chain. `stdin().lock().lines()` returns an
iterator which yields lines, each of which is a [`Result`][result] containing
either a string or an error. The rest of this chain filters out errors (`#1`),
parses line strings into a custom `Particle` type (`#2`), and finally collects
elements into a vector of particles (`#3`)`.

Steps `#1` and `#2` both make use of [filter_map][fm]. This is a method of
iterators which takes a closure. The closure takes an element and returns an
`Option`. When the option is `None` the element is filtered out. When it returns
`Some(value)` the element is mapped to `value` in the ongoing stream. Since
elements of the line iterator are `Result`s, I call `ok` on them, which returns
an [`Option`][option] type which discards an `Err(error)` for a `None`.
`filter_map` then unwraps the value for the next step in the chain, or filters
out the `None` (so line errors are effectively ignored).

Early on in my journey into Rust I found `Result`s and `Options` quite annoying.
I wrote a lot of `if`s and `unwraps` to force values out of them. After I while
I came across things like `filter_map`, `if let`, and `match` for working with
them more fluently, I realised that they're really neat.

The next step (`#2`) is to parse the line string into a `Particle` structure
wrapped in a result, and again discard errors and unwrap. Finally (`#3`) the
results are collected into a vector for easy use in the rest of the program.

You might have noticed that I've skipped a big chunk of what's going on in `#2`.
How do I parse lines into a structure which I've defined? By implementing
`std::str::FromStr` for the `Particle` structure, `parse` gains the
ability to parse to `Particle`. In the chain above, the type of `particles` is
`Vec<Particle>`, which is enough for Rust to infer that the call to `parse`
means to parse to `Particle`. This type annotation is also used by collect to
determine that we want `Particles` to be collected into a vector.

Here's the Particle definition:

```rust
struct Particle {
  position_x: isize,
  position_y: isize,
  velocity_x: isize,
  velocity_y: isize
}
```

There's not a lot to see here. It's really just a wrapper for `x` and `y`
positions and velocities as read from the input. I assumed that `isize` will
be sufficient to contain any values read (though this probably isn't the correct
integer type to use).

It's possible for a string to _not_ parse to a `Particle`. For this, a new type
of error needs to be defined. I'm just going to put it below here since there's
a lot I don't understand about defining errors in Rust yet.

```rust
use std::{
  fmt::{self, Display, Formatter},
  error::Error,
  num::ParseIntError
};

#[derive(Debug, Clone)]
struct ParseParticleError;

impl Display for ParseParticleError {
  fn fmt(&self, f: &mut Formatter) -> fmt::Result {
    write!(f, "Unable to parse to a Particle.")
  }
}

impl Error for ParseParticleError {
  fn description(&self) -> &str {
    "Unable to parse to a Particle."
  }

  fn cause(&self) -> Option<&Error> {
    None
  }
}

impl From<ParseIntError> for ParseParticleError {
  fn from(_error: ParseIntError) -> Self {
    ParseParticleError
  }
}
```

The one part I will dwell on is the final implementation. It allows
`ParseIntError` errors to be cast to `ParseParticleError`. This becomes handy in
the `FromStr` implementation:

```rust
use regex::Regex;
use lazy_static::lazy_static;
use std::str::FromStr;

const PARTICLE_REGEX: &str = r"<\s*(-?\d+),\s*(-?\d+)>.*<\s*(-?\d+),\s*(-?\d)>";

impl FromStr for Particle {
  type Err = ParseParticleError;

  fn from_str(particle_str: &str) -> Result<Self, Self::Err> {
    lazy_static! {
      static ref regex: Regex = Regex::new(PARTICLE_REGEX).unwrap();
    }

    regex.captures(particle_str)
      .ok_or(ParseParticleError)
      .and_then(|cap| Ok(Particle {
        position_x: cap[1].parse()?,
        position_y: cap[2].parse()?,
        velocity_x: cap[3].parse()?,
        velocity_y: cap[4].parse()?
      }))
  }
}
```

While Rust doesn't come with a library for working with regular expressions,
there is the excellent [`regex`][3] crate on [crates.io][2]. I used this
and [`lazy_static`][4] to match and extract numbers (as strings) from each line
of the input. This is a quick-and-dirty solution to parsing input. Rust has
other crates for parsing input which may be a better fit for other purposes. I
found their APIs difficult to comprehend and laborious though and given that
the source of the input here is low risk and the [regular expression
unsophisticated][6] I decided it was a reasonable course.

The creation of the regular expression is wrapped in `lazy_static`, which means
that this only occurs once, and subsequent calls to `from_str` will reuse it.
The documentation for the `regex` library suggests the use of `lazy_static`, so
there was no ingenuity on my part.

The regular expression matches lines which look like lines of the above input
sample, capturing the numbers (including a leading `-` if there is one).

Onto the chain! The regular expression is applied to `particle_str`. The call
to `captures` returns an option. The `ok_or` step in the chain turns a `None`
into a `ParseParticleError`. When the regular expression finds no match in a
string then it cannot be parsed to a particle!

The next step is an `and_then`. This unwraps `Some(value)` to `value` and passes
the value to its closure. Errors are waved past by this step. The return value
of the closure is a `Result`. There are four integers to parse. The regular
expression already filters out most issues, but an integer might still be too
large to be represented as an `isize`. [The `?` operator][?] unwraps result so
that a `Particle` structure can be composed. If any isize parse results in an
error, the error is immediately returned (and cast to a `ParseParticleError`).
Since the return value of this closure must be a `Result`, the particle is
wrapped in an `Ok`.

All of this effort to implement string parsing for `Particle` might seem
redundant given that errors are filtered out by the main function anyway, but I
enjoyed exploring this functionality of Rust. If you're interested in the full
code of my solution to day 10, you can find it [here][solution].

## Update 2019-04-22

I was told today about an interesting crate which automates a lot of the parsing
work in my code through use of a macro. The [recap][recap] crate neatly avoids
the need to manually apply a regular expression and extract elements from it,
parsing each individually.

Adding parsing of lines to particle structures now looks like:

```rust
use recap::Recap;
use serde::Deserialize;

#[derive(Debug, Clone, Deserialize, Recap)]
#[recap(regex = r"<\s*(?P<position_x>-?\d+),\s*(?P<position_y>-?\d+)>.*<\s*(?P<velocity_x>-?\d+),\s*(?P<velocity_y>-?\d)>")]
struct Particle {
    position_x: isize,
    position_y: isize,
    velocity_x: isize,
    velocity_y: isize
}
```

That's it! Errors produced (or lack thereof) might be quite different, I've not
checked it out in detail yet. For the purposes of the task though, it works
well. Named capture groups isolate elements by name, and the corresponding type
of the field in the particle `struct` is used to parse each. A gist containing
the complete updated solution can be found [here][solution-revised].

[1]: https://adventofcode.com/
[2]: hhttps://crates.io
[3]: https://crates.io/crates/regex
[4]: https://crates.io/crates/lazy_static
[5]: https://adventofcode.com/2018/day/10
[6]: https://regexper.com/#%2F%3C%5Cs*%28-%3F%5Cd%2B%29%2C%5Cs*%28-%3F%5Cd%2B%29%3E.*%3C%5Cs*%28-%3F%5Cd%2B%29%2C%5Cs*%28-%3F%5Cd%29%3E%2F
[fm]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html#method.filter_map
[?]: https://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/edition-guide/rust-2018/error-handling-and-panics/the-question-mark-operator-for-easier-error-handling.html
[solution]: https://gist.github.com/qubyte/f5a68779d4c7f14f2d722a5d13815bb4
[result]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/result/enum.Result.html
[option]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/option/enum.Option.html
[recap]: https://crates.io/crates/recap
[solution-revised]: https://gist.github.com/qubyte/d259676b4927a6fbe8fd5f99e61d2e62
