---
datetime: "2017-02-27T17:00Z"
title: "async-await and promises: Asynchronous functions"
---
You should new have grasp of the fundamentals of promises, and be sqeeky clean.
I know what you're thinking. Promises are just callbacks in disguise. You're not
wrong. They do a lot more than the previous post shows, but they're really just
a standard way of managing callbacks and caching values.

This is where asynchronous functions come in. With an asynchronous function you
can use promises without registering callbacks yourself. Here's a function which
wraps the bath stuff from the previous post up:

```javascript
function handleBathChange() {
  function onReady(temperature) {
    notification('Your bath is ready! ' + temperature);
  }

  function onError(error) {
    notification('Something went wrong! ' + error.stack);
  }

  bathReadyPromise.then(onReady, onError);
}
```

With an asynchronous function the callbacks can be avoided:

```javascript
async function handleBathChange() {
  try {
    const temperature = await bathReadyPromise;

    notification('Your bath is ready! ' + temperature);
  } catch (error) {
    notification('Something went wrong! ' + error.stack);
  }
}
```

Asynchronous functions have access to the `await` keyword. If the thing on the
right hand side of `await` is a promise, await suspends the function until the
promise becomes fulfilled or rejected. If the promise becomes fulfilled, it is
assigned to the varable on the left (`temperature` in this case). If the promise
becomes rejected `await` throws the rejection value.

Asynchronous programming in JavaScript has never looked so... synchronous.

What about outside the function though? When an asynchronous function is called
it returns a promise! The promise either fulfills with the return value of the
asynchronous function or it rejects an error when one with thrown within the
async function.
