---
datetime: "2017-11-14T17:00Z"
title: "Best practice tooling for JavaScript beginners"
---
I’ve noticed when helping people to learn JS is that I’m happy to let them learn
without any tooling. In hindsight this is very strange. I wouldn’t dream of
programming like this. At the very least a linter is essential. A linter such
as ESLint can also be an excellent learning tool, and can stimulate lots of
excellent questions from the student.

## Node.js

Node is a JavaScript environment without the browser. It is often used to build
servers, but that’s not what we need it for here. All modern JavaScript tools
are built to be executed by Node and installable with npm, a tool installed
along with Node.

With Node installed, when you are starting a new project or want to add tooling
to an existing one, open a terminal (on a Mac or Linux machine, or on windows
the Node.js prompt) and navigate to the project directory. Run

```shell
npm init
```

and answer the questions. This initialises your project with a `package.json`
file. This file is very powerful. It can be used to describe your project and
its dependencies (other libraries and tools it requires).

## Visual Studio Code

There are many editors out there, and which one you use is a personal
preference. Consider this section optional, but highly recommended.

VS Code is my current editor of choice. It integrates well with tools, feels
uncluttered, and doesn’t lag. Many editors can integrate with tools, but none
quite as nicely. I recommend installing it and using its plugin system to
install the ESLint plugin and the Editorconfig plugin. The installation of
ESLint into your project itself is covered in a later section.

Tip: Open the project directory in VS Code, not just a single file. It’ll
present you with a file explorer on the left so you can quickly open other files
in your project without leaving the editor. You’ll also be able to see files
which are usually hidden.

Tip: You can use VS Code to view git diffs, compose git commits, and push and
pull from a repository. If you prefer not to use git from the terminal, you may
find VS Code good enough most of the time.

Tip: If you do want to use git (or npm etc.) from the terminal, you can open a
terminal a panel in VS Code.

## ESLint

The single most important tool (except an editor, but more on that later) I use
each day is ESLint. It scans your code, and tries to tell you when you’ve made a
mistake or done something you probably didn’t intend. It can also be used to
enforce style. Just don’t use “standard”. You’ll pry my semicolons from my cold,
dead, hands. Instead I recommend my own (it’s pretty strict on style). To
install both do:

```shell
npm install —-save-dev eslint eslint-config-qubyte
```

When the command has finished, take a look in `package.json`. You’ll see a
`devDependencies` section with the tools and version numbers. You’ll also see a
new folder called `node_modules`. If you delete `node_modules`, you can run:

```shell
npm install
```

and npm will read `package.json` to know what to install. This is useful for
sharing your project without having to include all the dependencies.

With ESLint and a config installed, it must be configured to use the config.
Create a file in your project directory called `.eslintrc.json` (the leading `.`
is important) and put the following into it:

```json
{
  "extends": "qubyte",
  "env": {
    "browser": true
  }
}
```

This minimal configuration tells ESLint that you're "extending" the config from
`eslint-config-qubyte`. You can find out more about configuring ESLint
[here][eslint].

## Editorconfig
Editorconfig is not really a tool. It’s a standard for a file which describes
how code should look in each code file. Make a file called .editorconfig (all
lower case with a leading `.` as the first character in the name). Put the
following text into it and save:

```ini
# Apply settings to all text file
# types.
[*]

# Windows likes to choose weird
# encodings sometimes. Use this to make
# sure that wherever the file is saved,
# it's in the expected encoding.
charset = utf-8

# Use unix line endings everywhere for
# similar reasons as the charset above.
end_of_line = lf

# Wise to end on a new line character
# for unix.
insert_final_newline = true

# Indent using two spaces at a time.
indent_style = space
indent_size = 2

# Trims redundant spaces from the end
# of lines.
trim_trailing_whitespace = true
```

Tip: If you prefer another editor, Editorconfig has broad support.

[eslint]: https://eslint.org/docs/user-guide/configuring
