---
datetime: "2017-02-14T17:00Z"
title: "Promises: Making your own"
---
The previous blog posts explored the use of existing promises, but sometimes
you'll need to make your own. This is common when you need to wrap an older,
callback based API for example. When using promises, it's convenient for
everything asynchronous to be in promises!

Consider the Node.js file reading function `fs.readFile`.

```javascript
const fs = require('fs');

fs.readFile('/a/path/to/a/file', 'utf8', (error, content) => {
  if (error) {
    console.error('Error reading file.');
    return;
  }

  console.log(content);
});
```

This works just fine, but won't mix nicely with promises. This is particularly
bothersome when you want to use some of the patterns I'll describe in the next
post in this series.

You can wrap a callback based function in another function which returns a
promise:

```javascript
function readFile(path, options) {
  function executor(resolve, reject) {
    fs.readFile(path, options, (error, content) => {
      if (err) {
        reject(error);
      } else {
        resolve(content);
      }
    });
  }

  return new Promise(executor);
}

readFile('/a/path/to/a/file')
  .then(
    content => console.log(content),
    error => console.error('Error reading file.')
  );
```

In the above, the executor is a function which describes the behaviour of the
promise to be constructed. An executor takes a `resolve` argument and a `reject`
argument. Calling `resolve` with a value will unsurprisingly lead to the promise
becoming resolved with that value. Similarly, calling `reject` with a value will
lead to the promise becoming rejected with that value. Once either `resolve` or
`reject` has been called, all further calls of either will be ignored. If an
error is thrown _synchronously_ within the executor, the promise will become
rejected with the thrown value.

That means that this:

```javascript
var p = new Promise(resolve => {
  throw new Error('Oh noes!');
  resolve();
});
```

will become rejected with the value `"Oh noes!"`, but

```javascript
var q = new Promise(resolve => {
  setTimeout(() => {
    throw new Error('Oh noes!');
    resolve();
  }, 100);
});
```

will not be rejected (since the setTimeout makes the throw asynchronous), and
will not be resolved either, since the `resolve` call could not be reached.

This is important, especially for Node.js developers. Promises aren't a cure-all
for code that throws asynchronously. _Always_ handle errors properly and as
closely to the source of an error as possible. If a third party library is
throwing error which cannot be caught, contribute a fix to the library or ditch
it for something less buggy.
