---
datetime: "2017-02-12T17:00Z"
title: "Promises: The basics"
---
Probably the best way to get started with promises is to dive in and use them. A
recent browser API which works with promises is `fetch`. With `fetch`, making
requests from the browser is simpler than the aging `XMLHttpRequest` API.

If you're new to asynchronous programming with JavaScript, you will need to
familiarize yourself with _callbacks_. In brief, when a function does some
asynchronous work, it's really offloading the work to another process. When that
process has finished the work, it needs to be able to give information back to
your JS code. This is achieved by giving the function which does the
asynchronous work a function as one of its arguments. That function is called
a callback. For example, if you want to read a file in Node.js, you can do this
asynchronously:

```javascript
const fs = require('fs');

// This function will be the callback. In Node, the convention is that the first
// argument is reserved for an error (if one happens). You should then handle
// the error first. Remaining arguments are for when the asynchronous work was
// performed successfully.
function handleContent(error, content) {
  if (error) {
    // handle an error if one happens.
    return;
  }

  // handle content
}

// Begin the asynchronous work. With the path to the file, options, and the
// callback.
fs.readFile('/path/to/file', 'uft8', handleContent);
```

Another use of callbacks are events in the browser. For example, when you assign
a function to `onclick` or use `addEventListener`, you're using a callback.

```javascript
const button = document.querySelector('#click-me');

button.onclick = function helloCallback() {
  console.log('Hello from a callback!');
};

button.addEventListener('click', function anotherHelloCallback() {
  console.log('Hello from the other callback!');
}, false);
```

If you want to try out the examples that follow, pop open the console here.

Here's an example of a fetch for the index of this blog:

```javascript
fetch('https://qubyte.codes')
  .then(function onResponse(res) {
    console.log(`Got response with status ${res.status}.`);
  });
```

There are a few things going on here. It can be broken up a litte. This is
equivalent:

```javascript
const fetchPromise = fetch('https://qubyte.codes');

function onResponse(res) {
  console.log(`Got response with status ${res.status}.`);
}

fetchPromise.then(onResponse);
```

The call to `fetch` returns a promise. A promise is an object, and all we care
about at this point is that it provides a method called `then`. This method
allows you to register callbacks. If the promise resolves then these callbacks
are called in the order in which they were registered, each time with a
_resolution_ value. In other words, when the promise uses a callback registered
using `then`, that callback will be called with a single argument, which is the
resolution argument.

The following argument shows that callbacks are called in order of registration.

```javascript
const fetchPromise = fetch('https://qubyte.codes');

function onResponseA(res) {
  console.log('onResponseA called');
}

function onResponseB(res) {
  console.log('onResponseB called');
}

fetchPromise.then(onResponseA);
fetchPromise.then(onResponseB);

// onResponseA called
// onResponseB called
```

What about errors? The `then` method has a second slot for an error handling
callback:

```javascript
function onResponse(res) {
  console.log(`got response, status: ${res.status}`);
}

function onError(error) {
  console.error(`got error: ${error.stack}`);
}

// Rejects with an error.
fetch('nonsense://qubyte.codes')
  .then(onResponse, onError);

// Resolves with a 404 response.
fetch('https://qubyte.codes/should-respond-with-404')
  .then(onResponse, onError);
```

Here's where `fetch` behaves slightly differently to how you might expect. Any
response from the server is considered a success by fetch, since fetch has done
its job correctly. To trigger an error I've used a nonsense URI.

Another potential surprise is that when the promise resolves, the response
hasn't actually finished! The resolution occurs once the reponse headers have
been received. Find out how to get the response body in the next post in this
series.

Some precise information on promises states and how they call resolution and
rejection callbacks...

A promise exists in one of three states. It begins in the _pending_ state. It
_may_ transition from _pending_ to _resolved_, or _pending_ to _rejected_.
Both _resolved_ and _rejected_ promises may not make transitions. When a promise
becomes _resolved_, all resolution callbacks are called in order of registration
with the resolution value. When a promise becomes _rejected_, all rejection
callbacks are called in order or registration. When a resolition handler is
registered on a _resolved_ promise, it will be called asynchronously, and the
same is true of rejection handlers rejestered on an already rejected promise.
