---
datetime: "2017-02-15T17:00Z"
title: "Promises: patterns"
---
By now you're sold on promises, right? Back when most of my code was callback
based I used to use libraries to handle flow control. With promsies, patterns
are often so simple that no libraries are needed.


## waterfall

The simplest pattern is what I call the waterfall, which is a promise chain.

```javascript
aPromise
  .then(a => {
    // do something which makes b from a
    return b;
  })
  .then(b => {
    // do something which makes c from b
    return c;
  })
  .catch(e => {
    // handle an error
  });
```

Each step consumes the result of the previous. Don't forget, you can (and
probably should) have rejection callbacks for each step.

## concurrency

Since promises do asynchronous stuff, many promises can be doing things
concurrently. For example, if you have two files to read, it makes sense to do
this concurrently rather than one after the other. Using `readFile` from a
previous post in this series...

```javascript
const filesPromises = [
  readFile('/path/to/file/1'),
  readFile('/path/to/file/2')
];

Promise.all(filesPromise)
  .then(
    files => {
      // files is an array of resolution values (in this case file contents)
    },
    err => {
      // the first rejection value
    }
  );
```

`Promise.all` is very useful. It takes a list of promise and returns a new
promise. When all promises have resolved, the new promise resolves to an array
containing the resolution values in the same order as the original array of
promises (the order of resolution doesn't matter).

```javascript
Promise.all([
  Promise.resolve('a'),
  Promise.resolve('b'),
  Promise.resolve('c')
]).then(results => console.log(results)); // ['a', 'b', 'c']
```

If _any_ of the promises reject, then the promise returned by `Promise.all` also
rejects with the same rejection value. Only the first promise to reject is used.
Since there's currently no way to abort promises, the other promises will
continue!

## sequential execution

Sequential execution can be the trickiest to handle. I'll leave it to your
imagination! However, there's a cheat which I'll introduce in the next post...
