---
datetime: "2017-02-25T17:00Z"
title: "async-await and promises: Introduction"
---
tl;dr:

This is a series of posts which aims to introduce modern asynchronous
programming with JavaScript. Asynchronous programming is nothing new to JS. If
you've ever written a click handler you'll be familiar with callbacks. The
problem with callbacks is that they can quickly become cumbersome, and one often
has to resort to libraries to wrangle complex asynchronous logic.

More recently, features such as promises and async functions have been
standardised. While promises are quite complex beasts, async functions are often
very simple to use, and hide lots of of repetitive stuff behind some friendly
syntax sugar. It's possible to write very readable code with asynchronous
functions, and between them and promises there's enough standard stuff in the
language now that handling just about any asynchronous logic is much simpler
than it used to be. Libraries to handle async stuff can usually be avoided
altogether.

There are many articles out there on promises, and almost as many on async-await
(asynchronous functions). I wrote these articles for a friend who's dev team has
been working with callbacks and hasn't had much exposure to either feature. I've
written this series of posts as an introduction for them, but also to make sure
sure my understanding is solid. I tutor every now and then, and it's not enough
to just know how to use features like this. One must be teach them too.

This series is split into serveral parts.

 - A short introduction to promises
 - Asynchronous functions
 - Promise chains
 - Wrapping callbacks in a promise

