---
datetime: "2017-02-26T17:00Z"
title: "async-await and promises: A short introduction to promises"
---
Promises are the foundation upon which modern asynchronous programming in
JavaScript is done. This post summarises the most essential features of a
promise. Hopefully enough to move onto asyncronous functions while avoiding
the quite complex mechanics of them.

A promise is an object. A promise may be in one of three states:

 - pending
 - fulfilled
 - rejected

A promise which is pending may transition to the fulfilled or the rejected
state. A promise in either of the fulfilled or rejected states may make no
transitions.

As a programmer, you have no direct access to the state of a promise. The only
means you have for working with the states of a promise is by regestering
callbacks for the pending to fulfilled transition and for the pending to
rejected transition.

Let's say you're heavily into the internet-of-things (IoT), and you want a smart
bath. Whether or not this is a good idea is left for you, oh reader mine, to
decide. While programming it, you have a promise called `bathReadyPromise`. When
the bath is full and at the correct temperature with no issues, the promise
resolves (becomes fulfilled). If there was an issue of some kind (no hot water
for example), then the promise rejects. How would this look in code?

```javascript
function onReady(temperature) {
  notification('Your bath is ready! ' + temperature);
}

function onError(error) {
  notification('Something went wrong! ' + error.stack);
}

bathReadyPromise.then(onReady, onError);
```

The function `notification` I've used is fictitious. Perhaps it sends the
message to your networked slippers (they have a little LCD screen and vibrate).

The code above shows how fullfilled and rejection handlers are registered on the
promise. Each promise has a `then` method. The first argument is fora  callback
to be called if the promise becomes fulfilled. The second argument is for a
callback to be called if the promise becomes rejected. You can register as many
sets of callbacks as you like. You can even register callbacks _after_ the
transition has occurred, and they will still be called.

You can make simple resolved or rejected promises using the `Promise.resolve`
and `Promise.reject` function. Promise is provided by JavaScript for creating
and managing promises.

```javascript
const fulfilled = Promise.resolve('a value');
const rejected = Promise.reject(new Error('an error'));
```

A promise may resolve or reject with a single value. When a promise is rejected,
The rejection value will usually be an error (when making your own, always use
an error).

To demonstrate that registering callbacks works even after the state change,
consider the following:

```javascript
const fulfilled = Promise.resolve('some-value');

setTimeout(function () {
  fulfilled.then(function (value) {
    console.log('The resolution value was:', value);
  });
}, 1000);
```

Another behaviour to be aware of is that callbacks are always called
asynchronously. The following:

```javascript
Promise.resolve('abc').then(value => console.log(value));
console.log('def');
```

will log `'def'` before `'abc'`.

That's about it for the basics of promises! In the next post I'll introduce
asynchronous functions. In the meantime, enjoy that bath.
