---
datetime: '2018-06-21T00:31:03Z'
title: local microservices development with HTTPS
description: >-
  I describe how I set up a macos machine to develop microservice clusters
  locally using dnsmasq, a self-signed certificate, Docker Compose, and nginx.
tags:
 - nginx
 - microservices
---
When developing services and sites which will communicate over HTTPS, it pays to
develop in HTTPS, with a genuine looking set of hostnames and realistic ports.
i.e. instead of `http://localhost:8000` and `http://localhost:8080`, you
could have `https://service-a.devlocal` and `https://service-b.devlocal`.

This implies four things:
 - `.devlocal` domains must resolve to `127.0.0.7`.
 - A certificate for `*.devlocal` exists and is trusted.
 - A server exists to accept traffic for `*.devlocal` and route it to services
   by hostname. It should also terminate SSL using the aforementioned
   certificate.

This article ticks off these points. I'll address each in its own section.

## Resolving `devlocal` to `127.0.0.1`

This section applies only to macOS High Sierra. For other systems, other
solutions apply. For different versions of macOS, this will vary slightly.

A neat piece of software called dnsmasq. Dnsmasq can be used as a configurable
local domain name server. What we need to do for this use case is install it,
set it up to resolve `devlocal` to `127.0.0.1`, and get macos to check it.

## Creating a certificate for `*.devlocal`

Creating certificates can be a real pain, particularly if you want certificates
which modern browsers will be happy with.

## A server for SSL termination and routing by hostname

A good option for SSL termination and routing is nginx. It's very powerful, and
this use case really only scratches the surface.

## Tying it all together

Since services in the cluster will all be running at the same time, it's
convenient to use docker and docker compose to bring them all up locally.
