---
datetime: '2018-02-27T16:18:58Z'
title: Line-by-line breakdown of mixomatic
description: 'I describe one of my smallest libraries, line by line.'
tags:
  - JavaScript
---
Recently I've been enjoying the Node.js explainer blog posts of
[Safia Abdalla][safia]. Reading code is one of the best ways to learn to code. I
find it particularly helpful for learning the large scale architecture of
libraries and applications (this was a weak point for me when I moved into
industry). The aforementioned blog has a conversational tone which I enjoy too.

While it's not quite the same, those posts on code gave me the idea of
explaining one of my own modules. There's no discovery in this for me since I
wrote the module, but nothing teaches as well as teaching. I _should_ be able
to explain what every line of code in one of my own modules is doing and why!

The module I've chosen as the topic of this post is [mixomatic][mixomatic].
[The library itself][mixomatic-code] is on the smaller side, at 20 source lines
of code. While it is small, it packs in a lot of unusual stuff, so it's ideal
for this format of post.

Mixomatic is a library for creating mixins. In this context, a mixin is some
entity which provides methods (functions) for other objects to borrow. The idea
is that you compose objects by copying behaviour over to host objects. If this
sounds like constructor functions or classes, then you're not far off, and in
fact mixins are often used as a way to explicity avoid classes.

Why would we want to avoid classes?

In JavaScript constructor functions and classes (I'll just call them classes now
for brevity) can inherit from at most one parent class. Sometimes an
application may need to create objects more compositionally. The example given
in the readme document of mixomatic is a game similar to Asteroids. Every game
entity will have some state, like position and velocity. Other behaviours are
more specific though. For example, the player ship and asteroids may move,
but only the ship may accelerate. It's difficult to conceive of a chain of
inheritance which doesn't make the code difficult to modify later.

What would be better is to encode sets of behaviour as mixins, and apply them to
objects as necessary. There are several approaches to this, and they can get
complex quickly. The simplest is to have objects as mixins, with properties as
the methods we'd copy across. For example:

```javascript
const movable = {
  move(dt) {
    this.position.x += this.velocity.x * dt;
    this.position.y += this.velocity.y * dt;
  }
};

const ship = {
  position: { x: 100, y: 100 },
  velocity: { x: 0, y: 0 }
};

Object.assign(ship, movable);
```

`Object.assign` copies properties of `movable` onto the `ship` object. This
works, but one thing I really missed was having a working `instanceof` operator.
With a class hierarchy, every instance of a child class is also an instance of
the parent class, for example:

```javascript
class Parent {}

class Child extends Parent {}

const p = new Parent();
const c = new Child();

p instanceof Parent; // true
p instanceof Child;  // false
c instanceof Parent; // true
c instanceof Child;  // true
```

The `instanceof` operator is really handy for tests. If I know that an object is
and instance of a particular class, I can make lots of assumptions and focus on
testing the class as a whole.

So, how can we have our cake and eat it?

Mixomatic is the result of this line of thought. It provides a way to do mixins
_and_ still use `instanceof`.

This is a good place to start talking about the code of Mixomatic. Mixomatic is
a library which comprises a single function:

```javascript
export default function createMixin(propertyDescriptors) {
  // ...
}
```

This is an ES2015 module definition with a single default export, a function.
To import it as an ES2015 module, you'd do something like:

```javascript
import mixomatic from 'mixomatic';
```

and `mixomatic` would be the `createMixin` function. A build script uses
[rollup][rollup] to convert this to modules of other kinds for use with the
likes of Node.js and bundlers, or for use as an old-school library appended to
the `window` object. The important thing in this bit is that `mixomatic` is a
function, which takes a single argument `propertyDescriptors`. This is an object
which defines properties, as used by [`Object.defineProperties`][1]. It
provides a more general way of appending properties of an object. For example,
you might want to make properties non-writable. This object fully defines the
properties you want to append.

Inside the `createMixin` function a `WeakSet` is created.

```javascript
const mixed = new WeakSet();
```

A `WeakSet` instance is a collection of _weakly held_ references to objects.
Weakly held references are references that the JavaScript garbage collector is
allowed to ignore. An array or a `Set` are collections which strongly hold
references to objects. If you add a reference of an object to an array, then
the garbage collector can't clean it up until you've removed the reference.
With a `WeakSet`, the garbage collector is free to collect the object when no
strong references are held elsewhere. The tradeoff is that we're not allowed ask
a `WeakSet` what objects it contains. This is because the garbage collector can
run at any time, and if we ask before a collection we could get a different set
of objects than after a collection. This is also why we can't enumerate over
`WeakSet` instances.

What we _can_ do is ask a `WeakSet` instance if it contains a particular object.
This makes sense, since if we have an object to ask about then there's at least
one strong reference, and the garbage collector is not allowed to collect it.

To find out why we've make a `WeakSet` instance, we need the next chunk of
`mixomatic`:

```javascript
function mixin(obj) {
  Object.defineProperties(obj, propertyDescriptors);
  mixed.add(obj);
}
```

This function takes an object, applies the property descriptors to it, and then
adds the object to the `WeakSet` instance. The instance can be asked if an
object has been passed to the mixin, which implies that the property descriptors
have been applied to it! You can probably see where I'm going with this...

Which leads us to the next chunk:

```javascript
function checkInstance(obj) {
  for (let o = obj; o; o = Object.getPrototypeOf(o)) {
    if (mixed.has(o)) {
      return true;
    }
  }
}
```

This function does the checking for us, but is a little more complex than just
asking the `WeakSet` if it contains the object. That would have looked like:

```javascript
function checkInstance(obj) {
  if (mixed.has(obj)) {
    return true;
  }
}
```

So what's the `for` loop doing? This is because I want mixomatic to work well
with classes as well as objects. If a mixin is applied to the prototype of a
class, the its objects, and objects constructed by any child classes, will
inherit the properties defined by `propertyDescriptors`. For example:

```javascript
class Asteroid {}

const Movable = mixomatic({
  move(dt) {
    // ...
  }
});

Movable(Asteroid.prototype);

const a1 = new Asteroid();
const a2 = new Asterout();

// a1 and a2 will both inherit the `move` method.

class SpecialAsteroid extends Asteroid {}

const s1 = new SpecialAsteroid();

// s1 will also inherit the `move` method.
```

The mixed in methods will be there, but without checking the prototype chain
we won't know if it's because the mixin was applied somewhere.

In order to see if an object has inherited the properties applied by a mixin,
we must check the object, and each object in its prototype chain. If any of them
are in the `WeakSet` instance, we can return true. Otherwise the function
returns `undefined` (the default return).

Finally, the last chunk:

```javascript
return Object.defineProperty(mixin, Symbol.hasInstance, {
  value: checkInstance,
  configurable: false,
  enumerable: false,
  writable: false
});
```

First let's talk about the `return`. `Object.defineProperty` returns the first
argument it is given, so we could rewrite this chunk to:

```javascript
Object.defineProperty(mixin, Symbol.hasInstance, {
  value: checkInstance,
  configurable: false,
  enumerable: false,
  writable: false
});

return mixin;
```

This leaves us with the `Object.defineProperty` call. This is the singular
version of `Object.defineProperties`. The first argument is the object to append
stuff to, the second is the name of the property to be appended, and the third
is a property descriptor. Since mixin is a function, it is also an object and
may have properties. Most of the time property names are strings, but in this
case I'm using a special symbol, [`Symbol.hasInstance`][2].

`Symbol.hasInstance` is used to customise the behaviour of `instanceof`. If I
do an `instanceof` check on an object `obj` for `mixin`

```javascript
obj instanceof mixin;
```

then the `Symbol.hasInstance` property of `mixin` is checked for a function.
Since we've defined a function for this property, it is called with `obj` as
its argument, and the return value cast to `true` or `false`. The function I've
made the value of this property is `checkInstance`, so the above snippet is
equivalent to

```javascript
!!checkInstance(obj);
```

which returns true when `mixin` has been applied to the object, and `false` if
not!

This is exactly the behaviour I wanted. I function which applies properties,
just like `Object.defineProperties`, but with the added benefits of
`instanceof`. As a bonus, it cooperates well with classes and inheritance since
the prototype chain is honoured.

[1]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/defineProperties
[2]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Symbol/hasInstance
[safia]: https://blog.safia.rocks/
[mixomatic]: https://npmjs.com/package/mixomatic
[mixomatic-code]: https://github.com/qubyte/mixomatic/blob/master/index.js
[rollup]: https://rollupjs.org/guide/
