---
datetime: '2018-09-02T14:15:32Z'
updatedAt: null
title: How to test JavaScript
description: >-
  I've been a Node.js programmer for the better part of a decade, and the
  majority of the time I spend when programming is on tests. In this post I talk
  about what, why, when, and how to test.
tags:
  - JavaScript
---
I spend *a lot* of time writing tests for JavaScript, and over the years I've
developed some rules of thumb which determine my approach to tests, from what to
test all the way down to the names of tests. This post is an attempt to collect
all of these tips.

### What

What are tests? Tests are groups of code which are used to check that other code
behaves as it is expected to. Tests themselves don't run in production, the code
they test does. I spend more than half of time programming time writing tests.

### Why

Why write tests at all? It's a lot of effort to put into code which never runs
in production.

The short answer is that tests help you to detect bugs before your ship them.
If you write new code, you'll write companion tests to go with them. If you
write a bug fix, you can write new tests to go along with it to prevent
_regressions_ (prevent the same bug from occuring again). If you refector code,
existing tests will allow you to check that you're not introducing bugs.

You won't find many JavaScript programmers more knowledgeable about the language
than I am, and _the rate at which I produce bugs is scary_.

I occasionally have nightmares where I push code with no companion tests to
production.

To reiterate, tests:
 - Lower the odds of shipping lots of bugs with new code.
 - Prevent regressions after bug fixes.
 - Allow you to refactor fearlessly.

That all said, tests themselves can be imperfect and incomplete. You don't
completely prevent bugs getting to production with tests, but you can
significantly reduce the rate at which they happen. When possible you should be
practicing complimentary checks and balances, like code reviews and pair
programming.

### When

So hopefully you're sold on the idea of writing tests, but when do you write
them? There are different schools of thought on this, and in my opinion it
depends on what it is you are writing.

For example, if you're an HTTP API programmer in a company which has good
project management, you may be asked to write or enhance a REST API with a set
of endpoints with well defined behavior. In such a case you may want to directly
translate the acceptance criteria of the task into tests before you begin
programming the API. This approach is referred to as _test driven development_,
(TDD) and it's well suited to cases where the behaviour of what you are to
program is well defined _before_ you begin to program.

Another scenario might be a library. You may know broadly what it needs to do,
but the specifics are not set and you need to explore the problem space before
you arrive at a solution. In that case, you may write the tests _after_ the
code, but crucially you _should_ keep the tests in mind as you code the library.
In this way, tests follow code, but the need to test will still influece the
code you write.

tl;dr: Write tests before you ship. Never ship code which isn't covered by
tests.

### How

By now you're sold on writing tests, and hopefully there's enough business value
to the above to sell your manager/company on it too. How does one write tests?

There are a lot of libraries and utilities out there to help you write tests.
I'll give examples using [mocha][mocha] and [assertions][assertions]. Don't be
scared of trying out other libraries and replacements for assertions though!

#### Libraries

Here's a little library for me to test.

```plaintext
times-two/
├── package.json
├── index.js
└── test/
    └── index.test.js
```

The code lives in `index.js`.

```javascript
// index.js
function timesTwo(num) {
  return num * 2;
}

module.exports = timesTwo;
```

The package file includes the mocha as a dependency.

```json
{
  "name": "times-two",
  "version": "0.0.0",
  "description": "Multiplies a number by two.",
  "main": "index.js",
  "scripts": {
    "test": "mocha -r test"
  },
  "devDependencies": {
    "mocha": "^5.2.0"
  }
}
```

Since mocha runs code (the tests) not used in production, we won't need it in
production either, so it's a development dependency.

The `test` script is the standard name for running tests, and means you can use
`npm test` to execute the tests. The tests are going to be in
`test/index.test.js`. I begin with a `describe`, which is a global function
provided by `mocha`.

```javascript
const assert = require('assert');
const timesTwo = require('..');

describe('times-two', () => {
  // Tests and nested describes will go in here.
});
```

It may seem obvious when stated, but I always use the name of what it is I'm
describing as the first parameter to a `describe`. The function given to this
describe will contain tests, and may also contain nested `describe`s with their
tests, and so on. Since this is the top-level describe, I name it after the
library I'm writing. In general, I recommend that you always pass a noun as the
string parameter, since you're describing a thing.

Now I need to write a test. It can be difficult to think of what to test first,
so to get the ball rolling I usually begin with _what_ it is I'm testing. In
this case I'm testing a function.

```javascript
describe('times-two', () => {
  it('is a function', () => {
    assert.equal(typeof timesTwo, 'function');
  });
});
```

Individual tests are written with `it` function calls. This is another function
provided by `mocha`, and I usually only use these two. The string parameter
passed to `it` should complete a sentence beginning with "it". In this case the
sentence is "It is a function.", where "it" refers to the noun in the `describe`
that the test belongs to. In other words, we're saying:

 > times-two is a function.

The assertion in the test, in this case `assert.equal`, does a weak equality
check between the two parameters. Internally it looks a bit like:

```javascript
function equal(a, b) {
  if (a != b) {
    throw new AssertionError(`${a} == ${b}`);
  }
}
```

It throws an error when it's arguments are not weakly equal. Theres a
`stictEqual` function for when weak equality isn't effective.

For synchronous tests, as is the case above, a failure occurs when an error is
thrown.

Now that we've got the ball rolling, we can add a more specific test.

```javascript
describe('times-two', () => {
  it('is a function', () => {
    assert.equal(typeof timesTwo, 'function');
  });

  it('returns 4 when 2 is passed in', () => {
    assert.strictEqual(timesTwo(2), 4);
  });
});
```

This looks good, and the tests will pass. More tests will be needed. By writing
and exploring your own code with tests, some things may become more obvious. For
example, our library should probably check that its argument is a number, and
throw a `TypeError` for other types.

Since what we're testing here is a function, these are _unit tests_. In the
real world, you may find that you write these for standalone libraries and
sensitive code which must be exhaustively checked. Both scenarios are relatively
rare compared to how full blown applications are tested.

#### Applications

Applications present some interface to a consumer. For example, a web app may
present a user interface. A web service might present a REST API. Either way,
the application will likely have complex and asynchronous behviours, as well as
state. The most important thing to remember when writing application tests is
that you should be testing _behaviour_, not implementation.

Let's say I have a web service. This service stores todo notes for its users,
who must authenticate to identify themselves. This means that there'll be a
database.

This service will have a number of modules. There'll be some code to configure
a web framework, some authentication functions, some database wrapper functions,
etc. and these could all be subject to unit tests.

I must resist this temptation. A very few modules may require tests if they have
sensitive logic or are prone to bugs. The majority of the tests should be
testing the API itself, as if the tests are themselves a consumer of the API. By
doing this I'll be free to refactor all the private logic of the service, and
the public API will remain fixed and observed by the tests.

In the previous section, tests were stateless, so there was no need to
initialise or destroy state between tests. We're not so lucky with a service.

```javascript
async function clearState() {
  // Some code to clear a database.
}

before(async () => {
  await clearState();
});

afterEach(async () => {
  await clearState();
});
```

The `before` mocha function is outside of any `describe` calls, so it runs once
before everything. Unsurprisingly, `afterEach` runs after every test. When a
function passed to `it`, `before`, `after`, `beforeEach`, or `afterEach` returns
a promise, mocha will wait for that promise to resolve (or report an error if it
rejects). Since async functions look like regular functions which return a
promise, that behaviour applies here. The `clearState` function ensures that all
tests get a clean slate.

[mocha]: https://mochajs.org
[assertions]: https://nodejs.org/dist/latest-v10.x/docs/api/assert
