---
datetime: '2018-03-10T18:00:00Z'
title: The JavaScript prototype chain
description: An introduction to JavaScript inheritance with terrible diagrams.
tags:
  - JavaScript
---
If you've seen an article on the JavaScript `class` keyword, or on `this`, then
the odds are good you've seen the "prototype chain".

I don't think I've come across any explainers in the past which worked for me,
so I thought I'd take a shot at explaining the prototype chain and how it leads
to inheritance in JavaScript as _I_ understand it.

First, I'm going to make an object with no prototype:

```javascript
const myObject = Object.create(null);
```

I'm doing this because objects created with the object literal syntax `{}` have
a prototype, and it's a complication we don't need at this point. The `null`
argument tells `Object.create` to give the object it creates a `null` prototype.

The object I've defined behaves as you'd expect. You can assign and look up
fields as you would with any object. For example:

```javascript
myObject.hello = 'world';

console.log(myObject.hello); // Prints "world".
```

Now I'm going to create two objects:

```javascript
const myPrototype = Object.create(null);
myPrototype.hello = 'world';

const myObject = Object.create(myPrototype);
myObject.someThing = 'else';
```

The second object this time has been created with the first as its prototype.
We can start experimenting on both objects now, to see what having and being a
prototype actually does.

First of all `myPrototype` is just an object, as before:

```javascript
console.log(myPrototype.hello); // Prints "world".
```

Next, `myObject` also still behaves as an object.

```javascript
console.log(myObject.something); // Prints "else".
```

The first surprise is what happens when we ask `myObject` for a field which it
doesn't have, but `myPrototype` does:

```javascript
console.log(myObject.hello); // Prints "world".
```

I accessed a property of `myPrototype` via `myObject`. What happens when I try
to set that property via `myObject`?

```javascript
myObject.hello = 'goodbye';

console.log(myPrototype.hello); // Prints "world".
console.log(myObject.hello);    // Prints "goodbye".
```

It assigned the property to `myObject`, and not `myPrototype`. One way to view
this behaviour is as `myPrototype` being a set of default properties for
`myObject`. In other words, when checking `myObject` for a property, `myObject`
is checked first. If it explicitly has that field then that's what you get
(even if that field was set to `undefined`). If the property is
not on `myObject`, but it is on `myPrototype`, then you'll get the one from
`myPrototype`. If _neither_ has the property requested, then you get
`undefined`.

These two objects form a _prototype chain_, albeit a short one. `myPrototype`
can itself have a prototype object, which will be checked after, and so forth.
When checking for a property, every object in the chain is checked until the
property is found, or the `null` prototype is encountered (which is the end of
the chain).

For basic values like strings this isn't particularly exciting, but what about
functions? Say I want to make objects which represent a person:

```javascript
const personPrototype = Object.create(null);

personPrototype.sayHello = function () {
  console.log('Hello, ' + this.name + '!');
};

const alice = Object.create(personPrototype);
alice.name = 'Alice.';

const bob = Object.create(personPrototype);
bob.name = 'Bob';
```

We have two objects which have personPrototype as their prototype (I'll call
these person objects). Each has a name, and access to a function via the
prototype.

Firstly, it's important to point out that the prototype is shared by all person
objects. This means that `alice.sayHello === bob.sayHello`. The function
therefore needs some way to know which object it is being called on. The short
answer is that if the person in question is on the left hand side of the dot in

```javascript
alice.sayHello();
```

then that object on the left hand side is `this` inside the function on the
right hand side. `this` is a special word in JavaScript, and you have to be a
little careful with it (it can mean other things too depending on the
circumstances). In this context though, `this` in the function `sayHello` is the
object which it is being called from, `alice`. Therefore the above snippet
prints "Hello, Alice!".

The value of `this` can be explicitly set for a function using `call` or
`apply`. One example of when this comes in handy is when we want to know if a
property is coming from an object, or from somewhere in the prototype chain of
the object:

If you want to know where a field is coming from, then you can use
`Object.prototype.hasOwnProperty` to check:

```javascript
const myPrototype = Object.create(null);
myPrototype.hello = 'world';

const myObject = Object.create(myPrototype);
myObject.something = 'else';

Object.prototype.hasOwnProperty.call(myObject, 'something'); // true
Object.prototype.hasOwnProperty.call(myObject, 'hello');     // false
Object.prototype.hasOwnProperty.call(myPrototype, 'hello');  // true
```

Regular objects have access to `hasOwnProperty` via their prototype (more on
that shortly), but mine don't since they have no prototype! Worse, it's easy to
override that property with another function or value. I call it directly from
the prototype of Object, but to make sure the value of `this` is correct I need
to use call. When doing:

```javascript
someFunction.call(anObject, argumentOne, argumentTwo/*, ... */);
```

The first argument `anObject` is the object used as `this` inside the function
`someFunction`. Remaining arguments are the arguments passed to `someFunction`.
Similarly, I could have used `apply`.

```javascript
someFunction.apply(anObject, [argumentOne, argumentTwo/*, ... */]);
```

The difference is that `apply` takes arguments to pass to the function as an
array.

It's possible to put lots of functions onto an object and use it as a prototype.
The lookup behaviour means that you can have a chain of more than one prototype,
each providing or overriding methods. Each prototype can be said to _inherit_
properties of the prototype chain behind it.

This is the essence of the prototype chain and inheritance in JavaScript.
Unfortunately, the story from here gets a bit more messy.

Let's start with Objects. When you create an object using the literal syntax, it
will have `Object.prototype` as its prototype. Functions are an interesting...
They have `Function.prototype` as their prototype, and the prototype of
`Function.prototype` turns out to be `Object.prototype`. This can be checked:

```javascript
Object.getPrototypeOf(Function.prototype) === Object.prototype; // true
```

It may strike you as strange that prototype objects are provided as the
`prototype` field of built in functions like `Object` and `Function`.
Technically `Object` and `Function` can be used to _construct_ objects and
functions, but this should almost never be done. The literal syntax is always
preferred. In the case of things like strings, numbers, and booleans you don't
even get strings, numbers, and booleans. You just get useless objects.

For your own code though, you can define constructor functions, and configure
the prototype of objects it constructs by appending things to the `prototype`
field of the constructor. Let's take another look at the person example.

```javascript
function Person(name) {
  this.name = name;
}

Person.prototpe.sayHello = function () {
  console.log('Hello, ' + this.name + '!');
};
```

This defines a person constructor and prototype (often called a _class_, which
should be distinguished from classes in other object oriented languages).
Constructor functions are usually given an initial capital letter in their name.
They're also called in a special way:

```javascript
const alice = new Person('alice');
const bob = new Person('bob');
```

The `new` keyword alters the behaviour of the function it is called with. In a
constructor, `this` appears again, and is a reference to the object being
constructed. In the case of `Person`, it is creating objects with a `name` field
set to the given string. Objects constructed by `Person` are called instances of
`Person`. There's even a special operator to check this:

```javascript
alice instanceof Person; // true
{} instanceof Person;    // false
```

Constructors can be more convenient than creating objects with `Object.create`,
since they can contain all the setup logic for instances within the constructor,
and way of appending stuff to the prototype is simple. The `instanceof` operator
can also be really useful for writing tests.

Since the 2015 standard, there's another syntax for creating constructors which
is a little more convenient:

```javascript
class Person {
  constructor(name) {
    this.name = name;
  }

  sayHello() {
    console.log('Hello, ' + this.name + '!');
  }
}

const alice = new Person('alice');
const bob = new Person('bob');
```

This is _mostly_ syntax sugar for a constructor function and methods appended to
the prototype.

One thing which is particularly awkward to do using constructor functions is
make one inherit from another (by putting the prototype of one before the other
and sharing some setup logic).

Constructors created using `class` make it easier:

```javascript
class Programmer extends Person {
  constructor(name, favouriteLanguage) {
    // Call the parent (Person) constructor. This must
    // be called before you can use `this`.
    super(name);
    this.favouriteLanguage;
  }

  sayFavouriteLanguage() {
    console.log(this.name + '\'s favourite language is ' + this.language +'.');
  }
}
```

`Programmer` inherits from `Person`, so instances will have access to the
`sayHello` function. Instances will also be considered instances of both
`Person` and `Programmer`:

```javascript
const mark = new Programmer('Mark', 'JavaScript');

mark instanceof Programmer; // true
mark instanceof Person;     // true

mark.sayHello();             // Prints "Hello, Mark!"
mark.sayFavouriteLanguage(); // Prints "Mark's favourite language is JavaScript."
```

While classes make inheritance easy, and there are good reasons to use them,
you should avoid using them too much. The above example is one in which I
_should not_ have extended a class. Let's say I make another child class for
pianists called `Pianist`. `Pianist`s are instances of `Person`, but they can't
be instances of `Programmer`. In the real world a person may be both!

Where classes shine is for abstract stuff like the base classes of frontend
frameworks, or creating specialised event emitters in Node.js. If you're not
sure if you should be extending a class, then it's usually best not to. Prefer
flat class hierarchies, or better still, plain old object literals!
